Alderson - A PBEM of Galactic strategy (V 1.5)


1. Introduction


A long, long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away...

Or maybe in our future, here, in the Milky Way? Who knows what surprises the
future holds for the human race.  One thing is sure, there is no one out there,
or we'd have met them.  The star lanes were thought to be too difficult anyway.
Until Alderson.  He theorised that weak points exist in the fabric of the
space-time, out at the fringes of gravity wells.  From those weak points, one
could "jump" to anothe weak point.

It took years to mount an expedition, place proper equipment and get to the
fringe of the Solar system.  There, one such weak point was located, and the
experimental "Alderson Drive" used.  The expedition came back unscathed, with
pictures of a different star system...  It took 3 months to triangulate, and
find out that the explorers had gone out to more than 750 light-years... in the
wink of an eye.  And had come back the next week.

Today, Man has started to spread out, using the Alderson points that link
together the galaxy in a gigantic whole.  The galaxy is vast, but seemingly
empty.  Rich resources await the dynamic explorer, the astute trader, the smart
operator and the strong captain.  There are no limits... but those of your
imagination.


1.1. In-game History

Two hundred years ago, a terran physicist, Alderson, proved out the existence
of stable space-time anomalies in the wormhole category.  The so-called Points
consist of a wormhole, whose effective length and diameters are of the order of
the proton (near effective zero).  However, Points are stable, and link two
fixed regions of space time, provided the relativistic distortion between the
two are not too high.

What was a curiosity at first became more interesting when Alderson's next
paper showed up that a simple device would be able to take the point, and
enlarge it englobe almost any size and shape of a sufficiently high density.
Alderson's "jump" would transport any physical object almost instantaneously as
long as it was triggered while the immaterial point was within the structure
that was transported.  Star Trek warp drive was out, but the "hyperspace"
jump was in.

The catch was, Alderson Points required a space-time well to form, but were
stable only on relatively flat space-time.  So, barring special conditions,
Points would form only in star systems, but far out of them, requiring
powerful space ships to move toward the Alderson Corona, the place near enough
a sun to allow them to form, while far enough to prevent their disruption.

Alderson's formula allowed people to compute the geometry, and find out the
position of the two stable points in Earth solar system.  The rest is history.
With the potential of going through the galaxy within a single lifetime,
competing teams made ships, and rushed out, further than Pluto's orbit, to
reach Alderson Points.  The theory was vindicated by facts, and a
euro-brasilian crew became the first men to see a different sun with their own
eyes, and not merely look at a star through telescopes.

Within decades, hundreds of star systems were scouted, industrial bases and
colonies created around remote planets... and wars raged.  The control of the
Alderson Points, the mandatory passage between places, became an obsession,
and democracies exploded, incapable of facing fanaticism and greed over a
galactic scale.  What started as an obscure theocracy in a remote system swept
out, and in fifty years controlled all the human foam, bureaucracy slowly
replacing clergy.  Only Earth, and a few scattered settlements remained
nominally independent; the settlements because of their isolation and total
lack of importance, and Earth because of its billions, its well-established
industrial base, and the small, subconscious respect for the mother planet.

Then, disaster struck. In a single day, almost in a single moment as far as
measurement could tell afterwards, all Alderson Points simply shut down,
without explanation.  More than 28% of the population of the Imperium died
during these few months, as interstellar commerce was forcibly shut down,
and colonies lacking essential resources began to starve or suffocate.
Calculus showed where the Points should be, but they did not appear on
space-time scanners, nor would the jump engines work.

After four months of terror, Alderson points started to reactivate as
mysteriously as they had shut down.  One by one, Points reappeared where they
had been before.  Most of them led to the same points, but other, more stable
configurations appeared, replacing some known links.  The Imperium almost fell
during that period, and contact was never resumed with 10% of the systems.

However, two glaring oddities remained.  Even after all Alderson Points had
reopened, two of them remained obstinately inactive.  All calculations showed
that these should exist, that they should open to a destination.  But none
were detectable at the required places.

Those two points previously led to Earth.

Even today, after nearly 100 years, the two points remain obstinately inactive.
Systems in radio range scanned the sky, listening for the incessant radio
chatter coming out of the solar system, and reported the great silence.  After
relativistic corrections, radio activity from the heavily encrypted links out
of the solar system had started to dwindle two days before the Shutdown, and
had been reduced to zero in a week.  Conventional astronomy showed no oddities.
No change in Earth albedo, so it didn't get nuked.  No odd orbital changes, so
the entire system was more or less unperturbed.  But the total silence was
more than enough to show that Something had happened.

War?  Accident?  Deliberate messing with the space-time (as impossible as it
sounds)?  Invasion by aliens?  No one knows.  Talks of sending slower than
light ships or probes regularly surface, but no one has really taken a step
toward implementing any realistic scheme.

The only thing remaining is now the Fear.


2. Principles

2.1. The game

Alderson is a play by mail strategic game in a futuristic galaxy setting.  Each
player represents an "Interest", usually a corporation, an association, a fleet
or all of the above.  Alderson is played using E-Mail.  Each turn, typically
once a week, the player receives a full quarterly report, detailing what has
gone on during the past period in all its possessions, colonies, settlements
and starships.  The player then ponders matters, discuss with other players,
and sends back to the game server an order form detailing the activities for
the next game quarter.  The game server will gather all those orders, advance
the time mark one additional quarter, and sends back new reports.  And the
cycle begins anew.


Alderson belongs to the family of Open Play-by-Email Games, i.e., it has no
definite end or victory condition.  Instead, players define their own goals,
and measure their progression using their own criteria.  Some will become
thriving settlement administrators, running industrial or farming planets, and
highly successful shipbuilding consortium.  Others will become intrepid
explorers, scouting ever farther in the galaxy, coming back to sell information
on new resources, new technologies, new systems to colonise.  Some will manage
huge trading empires, exploiting rare or useful commodities, selling back to
others products from afar.  And finally, some might become warlords, jealously
defending their domains against any form of intrusion, or even marauding
pirates, living off settlements and undefended starships...


2.2. Sample report

The basics of Alderson will be shown using a sample report from an imaginary
player.  The contents of the sample report are not supposed to reflect a
possible situation in the game.  Technologies, modules, star systems and the
like may be different in the running game.


2.2.1. Heading

>> Alderson Report for Masarian Combine [mc54], john.smith@some.net
>> Report period #35: 1st quarter, 2766
>> Next deadline is: February 7th, 2001
>>
>> You have a credit line of $60754.

All Alderson reports start with the above lines, in one form or the other.  The
first line indicates your identification.  In the game world, the interest for
this report is known as the "Masarian Combine", and is managed through the
email address of "john.smith@some.net".

Masarian Combine is a simple name, which appears in the reports.  It has no
in-game signification.  The important part is the "mc54" that appears in square
brackets.  It is the interest's identifier.  All in-game entities, places,
technologies, and man-made built structures have a unique identifier, which
is composed of one or more letters or digits, enclosed in square brackets for
ease of identification within a report.  These identifiers are unique, each
refers to one specific game element.  Thus, if someone wants to refer to your
interest within an order form, he will use the mc54 identifier - to declare you
an ally or an enemy to be shot on sight.

Next comes the report period.  You can see this is turn number 35 since the
game beginning.  The in-game date is March 31, 2766 - the first quarter of the
year has finished.  Each quarter is divided in 13 weeks; you can ignore the
extra days, or leap years.

For simplicity's sake, no relativistic effects are assumed. Time flows at the
same speed in all parts of the universe.

You now have until the february 7th wednesday, real time, to decide your
actions for the upcoming game quarter.

Finally, your interest benefits from a credit line of 60754 galactic units.
For simplicity's sake, and to reduce report size, the US cash symbol '$' is
used to denote galactic units.  There is no rate change between Earth dollar
and galactic units since the Alderson point linking Earth suddenly shut off
some 100 years ago, closing off Earth from the rest of the Galaxy.  Indeed, a
single galactic unit represents many thousand of current-day dollars.  Galactic
imperial units are accepted in the whole of the galaxy and have the same value
everywhere.

Your credit line may be used in a variety of ways.  Typically, you may pay your
employees salaries from the credit line or local cash.  Credit lines may also
be used at any civilised location for purchases or similar activities, as long
as that location is linked to the galactic banking network. All computer-
managed locations have this link, and will accept units from your credit line
instead of cash.  Some technologies also allow you to put cash back into your
credit line, to wire directly cash from one credit line to another, or to
convert a credit line into hard cash.


2.2.2. Star systems

>> Star systems:
>> Beta Epsilon Mutorae [S5578], M4 star (655,-231,100).

The next part of the report shows all your locational reports.  Your have a
presence in the Beta Epsilon Mutorae system, a system of the M4 stellar class.
That system is located in the galactic co-ordinates at 655,-231,100.  The
galaxy center is located in 0,0,0.  This gives you an indication of the
distance, in parsec, that separates the various systems you may know.

>> * Point [S5578A] to Gamma Tau Lyrae [S966], alderson point at UA 26
>>
>> * Point [S5578B] to Omicron Nu Nautae [S6550], alderson point at UA 25
>>   - Birgon station [5569], Ycromae Hive [tr31], wheel station. Size: 40000.
>>
>> * Point [S5578C] to Theta Gamma Virgo [S8851], alderson point at UA 24

The various features of the system are then shown, in decreasing distance from
the central star.  Thus, the Alderson points - three in this system - are
shown first.  Alderson points are very usually far from the inner system.
Physics have demonstrated the possibility of having Alderson points in an
inner system, but those seem to be very rare.

The three Alderson points have their destination indicated.  A ship located at
one alderson point may JUMP to the matching Alderson point in the destination
system.  Alderson points are always in pair, and all have been reported as
being bi-directional.

One of the Alderson points has a construction present: Birgon station.  You
do not know any information about Birgon station, except its affiliation
(The Ycromae Hive) and basic structure, which is a wheel-shaped space station.
The hull gives a good indication of the size of the structure: The station has
40000 units of storage, as seen from the outside.  Part of this will be used by
the station infrastructure, the rest may hold spaceships docked inside,
materials, goods in transit, and so on, or even empty space, reserved for
future development.  Unless you dock, however, you have no way of knowing what
is inside or
not.

2.2.3. Inner system

>> * Asteroid field [S5578D], asteroids at UA 14
>>   Resources: 155 iron [iron], 101 titanium [tita], 19 uranium [uran].
>>   - Orbital factory [2911], Ycromae Hive [tr31], wheel station. Size: 30000.
>>   - Space tug [2960], Ycromae Hive [tr31], spaceship. Size: 10000.

The next feature present is an asteroid field.  Asteroid fields are usually
very useful, and resource rich.  This asteroid can be assessed quickly to be
able to produce 155 units of iron ore each quarter, 101 of titanium, and 19 of
uranium.  A good location for a mining concern.  Unsurprisingly, there is an
orbital factory, run by the Ycromae again.  It is a smaller station than the
outlying Birgon station.  It is probably producing full tilt some materials
or products, which the Space tug will probably ferry somewhere.

You will note that all structures advertise their interest affiliation.  This
is the default setting.  Usually, only pirates or ships dispatched on discrete
missions, as well as undeclared colonies will hide their affiliation.  An
unaffiliated ship or colony is usually treated as hostile.

Iron and titane are good construction materials for basic structures.  Iron
will be used in factories and many basic structures, and titanium for more
sophisticated structures.  Uranium may be useful, some technologies use it
to power their factories and starships.

>> * Beta Epsilon Mutorae III [S5578E], gas giant at UA 10
>>   Resources: 201 helium3 [hel3], 1001 oxyhydro [h2o2]

We're leaving the domain of the asteroids for the outer planet, number III.
This one is a gas giant, unsuitable for colonies or outposts.  Like the
asteroid field, it has some resources. Helium3 is important in fusion
technologies.  Oxyhydro is also useful for some technologies, to provide
reaction mass for ships and to supply remote outposts.

2.2.4. Star ships

>>   + The Star Gobbler [8112], Masarian Combine [mc54], 2 spaceship [shull1].
>>     Size:6080/10000, mass:6609/20000, crew:26/30 energy:90/120,
>>     defence:25(18), attack:20(14), upkeep:$790, tech:0/2. Speed: 3.026.
>>        week 13: spared $100 upkeep
>>        week 13: paid $887 upkeep

Ah! Your first spaceship, orbiting planet III.  You have a lot more details on
this spaceship than you had on the Ycromae ships.  From the outside, your
spaceship would probably look like:

>> - The Star Gobbler [8112], Masarian Combine [mc54], spaceship. Size:10000.

Only you, or the owner of a host module placed inside of it, would be able to
look at the details of the star ship.

The ship is built using modules.  You start a space ship, settlement, outpost
or anything else using a core module.  Settlement and outpost bases cost almost
nothing to create, and are used as a grouping.  Space bases, ships, orbital
factories all require a specific module to be manufactured and serve as the
base for the construction.  The module types for such structures determine what
type the structure will be: space stations are fixed, settlements can occur
only on planetary surfaces, while starships move.

Star Gobbler was built using 2 spaceship hulls assembled together.  This drives
the maximum size of the starship.  In the example above, all hulls provide room
for 5000 units, and provide a defence factor of 10, so the starship begins with
room to hold 10000 units and a defence of 20.  Further factors will modify
this. We'll skip over the number in parentheses for now; these represent your
effective defence and attack (see detailed rules on battles).

The ship displays a summary of the overall spaceship.  For example, the ship
uses 6080 units of size overall, leaving room for lots of improvements.  If you
check carefully, this size is the sum of the size in all the modules.
In a similar manner, you have a crew summary (you have 30 crew available for
26 required), your mass (you have 6609 total mass, and your drive is geared to
move up to 20000 units of mass), energy requirements, and total maintenance
costs.  Your ship is fully operational, it seems: light, powerful, with a
complete crew...

>>     + Command bridge [c8112], command bridge [cbridg]. Size:800, mass:300,
>>       crew:10, energy:5, upkeep:$100, defence:5, attack:5, tech:1/1. Tech:
>>       military tactics [miltact].

Each separate module then provides a separate report.  You have four modules
stored in there.  The command bridge is mandatory for any starship.  Unless
you have a command bridge, your ship cannot move.  Once modules are added to
a spaceship, no more hulls may be added.  Some space stations may have modules
added after occupancy has begun.

The command bridge also has a special section, named "Tech".  Tech indicates
which technologies you master, and are stored in the appropriate library and
computers of the module.  Each module may store a number of technologies.  Once
it is full, technologies must be erased to make room for new technologies.
The report includes a technology amount and size used for the module.

Technologies provide specific benefits, and may usually be freely copied
between modules of the same interest and of different interests.  If the
technology is applicable to the module, it will either provide direct benefits,
or be used to make something.  Here, the military tactics (identifier miltact)
enables a +5 attack and defence factors from the command bridge.  Military
tactics could be stored in other modules, but would not provide any benefits
there.

>>     + Crew quarters [q8112], 3 crew quarters [crewq1], has: 30 crew [crew],
>>       188 food [food]. Size:1500, crew:3/30, mass:2508, energy:3,
>>       upkeep:$150, tech:0/3.
>>          week 1: consumed 30 rations [rati]
>>          week 13: paid $450 wages

Then you have crew quarters.  Crew quarters provide habitat for your starship
crew.  You have 3 such quarters installed.  Each quarter may hold up to 10 crew
members.  You have the full 30 crew members residing there, and food for some
time.

>>     + Fusion central [f8112], 3 fusion reactors [fusrec], has: 201 helium3
>>       [hel3]. Size:1500, crew:9, mass:1401, energy:0/120, attack:9,
>>       upkeep:$300, tech:2/3. Tech: cold fusion [coldfus], helium storage
>>       [helstor].
>>          week 1: consumed 3 helium3 [hel3]
>>     + Starship drives [d8112], 2 reaction drives [rdrive], has: 200 oxyhydro
>>       [h2o2]. Size:1200, crew:2, mass:1600/20000, energy:80, upkeep:$200,
>>       tech:0/2.

In a similar manner, fusion reactors provide fusion power and energy to the
spaceship, and drives provide propulsion.  A large variety of modules may be
added to the ship, such as cargo bays, research laboratories, mobile factories,
and so on, making each spaceship truly unique.

The fusion reactor has two technologies used.  Fusion power is an intrinsic
technology of the fusion reactor ; it cannot be erased from the reactor to make
room for another.  If somebody captures a fusion reactor, the interest will be
able to duplicate the technology and enjoy its benefits.  The other is an
optional technology: it enables helium3 to be stored in the fusion reactors
areas.  Otherwise, you would have to put special storage modules in the ship,
which would take room, energy and crew, and store helium3 in those modules to
fuel the ship reactor.

Each module may report events.  The starship, for example, reported on the
last week of the game turn the payment of the upkeep of the starship.  This
upkeep represents the cost of maintenance over the starship. If the costs
cannot be met, ship performance may suffer and degrade, requiring costly
refits at orbital yards.  The cost paid are higher than the cost indicated on
your report.  This happens because being in space increase the wear of your
equipment.

Other costs may be paid.  Each module reports on these.  The crew, for example,
consumed 1 ration per crew member, and required $15 per crew member.  In the
same manner, the fusion generator requires 1 helium3 per reactor to function.
If no helium3 is provided, the reactor shuts down, leaving your ship derelict
in space.  If no energy is provided to the crew quarters, your crew may die!
Your space drives, however, did not consume anything.  You did not move this
turn.

Each module may be given separate orders (we'll see later).  Typically, the
starship module will be given orders to move around, the crew will be ordered
to eat specific rations, and items may be moved around.


2.2.5. Colonies

>> * Beta Epsilon Mutorae II [S5578F], terran planet at UA 5
>>   Resources: 31 iron [iron], 100 oxyhydro [h2o2], 50 carbon [carb], 911
>>     food [food].

The next planet is further inward.  This one is a terran planet, suitable for
colonisation and living.  This one is not very rich in resources, but may be
a good farming planet, as it can produce over 900 food per turn.  Oxyhydro
and carbon sources also abound, as in most terran planets.

>>   - Indiroma [201], Imperium [npc1], city. Size: 1000000.
>>     Buy: 200 food [food] at $10, 50 iron [iron] at $30, 5 uranium [uran]
>>          at $300
>>     Sell: 40 crew [crew] at $100, 18 titanium [tita] at $100.

There is already one city here, run by the imperium.  The Imperium is a NPC
interest.  That planet provides a local market. You may sell food, iron ores
or some uranium mined from the asteroid belts.  You may also recruit some local
crew members, or buy some titanium.

>>   + Colony [1756], Masarian Combine [mc54], 4 settlement [settlm].
>>     Size:31000/40000, crew:65/155, energy:65/65, upkeep:$1567,
>>     defence:32(20), attack:3(2), tech:0/4.
>>        week 13: spared $2250 in maintenance costs
>>     + Living quarters [l1756], 17 apartments [apartm], has: 155 crew
>>       [crew], 155 food [food]. Size:22100, crew:0/155, energy:17,
>>       upkeep:$1020, tech:1/17. Tech: advanced city planning [acitypl].
>>          week 1: consumed 155 food [food]
>>          week 13: got 155 food [food] from Farming concern [f1756]
>>          week 13: paid $2325 wages
>>          week 13: discovered advanced city planning [acitypl]!
>>     + Farming concern [f1756], 5 farming complex [farms1], has: 40 food
>>       [food]. Size: 5000, crew:25, energy:25, upkeep:$250, tech:0/5.
>>          week 1: sold 40 food [food] at $10 each to Indiroma [201]
>>          week 13: harvested 195 food [food]
>>          week 13: handed 155 food [food] to Living quarters [l1756]
>>          week 13: lent $800 to Living quarters [l1756]

The colonies are similar to starships, except that they do not have a mass
indicated, as they never move.  The same rules apply for the settlement, and
the various parts of the city.  Your settlement is ok, except that it is now
at energy saturation.  You will have to build another reactor soon...

>>     + Mines [m1756], core drill [mines1], has: 70 iron [iron]. Size:1000,
>>       crew:6, energy:5, upkeep:$40.
>>          week 3: harvested 3 carbon [carb]
>>          week 4: handed 3 carbon [carb] to Coal plant [p1756]
>>          week 13: harvested 30 iron [iron]

A mine (or any extraction facility) is very useful in any location.  The mine
will enable you to extract carbon, iron and other raw materials to use in your
industries.  A single mine may produce many different items.  In the example
above, the mine produced some carbon and some iron.  It might also have been
used to produce the third resource on this planet, oxyhydro (to fuel your
ship).

Note that this mine does not display a technology amount. Core drills cannot
be loaded with additional technologies, and so are unsuitable for special
resources extraction.

>>     + Energy central [e1756], fission reactor [fisrec], has: 80 uranium
>>       [uran], 17 wastes [wast]. Size:400, crew:20, energy:0/40, upkeep:$107,
>>       attack:2, tech:0/1.
>>          week 1: consumed 1 uranium [uran], produced 1 wastes [wast]
>>     + Coal plant [p1756], coal-burning plant [cplant], has: 10 carbon
>>       [carb]. Size:1000, crew:2, energy:0/25, upkeep:$50, attack:1,
>>       tech:0/1.
>>          week 1: consumed 1 carbon [carb]
>>          week 4: got 3 carbon [carb] from Mines [m1756]
>>     + Construction works [c1756], factory [factry]. Size:1000, crew:10,
>>       energy:15, upkeep:$60, tech:0/1.

You have two energy producing elements here. One is an old reactor, using
fission power instead of cleaner fusion power.  It consumes uranium instead of
helium, but produces wastes products.  Waste products require people to store
and manage them, and accumulate, until disposed of... The other is a primitive
coal plant, burning off carbon (but you do not have to worry about pollution).

If one of the crew or energy requirements fall down, your various modules will
work at reduced efficiency, in proportion of the missing crew part.  Even if
your construction works are unused, they still require crew, energy and
maintenance.  It is a lot better to shut down an unused module for the
duration.


2.2.6. Last planet

>> * Beta Epsilon Mutorae I [S5578G], airless planet at UA 2

The last planet indicated is lifeless. What's even worse, it is airless, which
means that any settlement there will require oxygen at periodic intervals for
the survival of the crew there.  In fact, no one has established any settlement
there (yet).

You notice that no report on resources appear.  You get a report on resources
only if:

- You have a unit or base present at the feature;
- The feature is an asteroid field, or oort cloud, whose open natures allow
  simple and easy spectroscopic scan.

Some resources are advanced resources, which require special advanced
technologies to harvest.  These resources do not appear on the report unless
the unit present at the feature has the required technology to scan for them;
usually the same technology as required for harvesting.  This is true even for
asteroids and oort clouds.  You need a unit present at the feature to see the
special resources, even if you can assay the normal, basic resources, from
anywhere in the system.


2.2.7. Knowledge reports

Following the various systems in which you have an outpost, a knowledge report
indicates what new technologies, modules or products you have discovered this
turn.

>> Technologies:
>>
>> advanced city planning [acitypl]: Experience in architecture and sociology
>>   have led to better living quarters, housing more people per habitat. This
>>   technology allows +1 crew per module. Technology works in habitation
>>   modules. Tech level 2.

You have discovered the advanced city planning this turn.  The technology will
enable you to have 1 additional people in an habitat module.  Your living
quarters that had previously 10 maximum crew per module may now hold 11 crew,
for the same size and energy requirements.  This technology works only when in
an habitation module.  It is also a level 2 technology, simple enough to store
in most modules of a large enough size.

>> Modules:
>>
>> hangar bays [cargo1]: Those huge cargo bays may be used to hold large
>>   amount of cargo, or some ships or modules to be delivered to settlements.
>>   Each module will store up to 3000 units of size. Storage module.
>>   Size:3100/3000, crew:1, mass:400, energy:1, upkeep:$70, tech:0/1.

Next comes modules.  The module described above is a basic module, accessible
with any technology level.  It takes 3100 in size in a spaceship or settlement
size, requires 1 crew to manage it, 1 energy to power it, and mass 400 units.
Each turn, $70 is required for the maintenance of one hangar bay.  Finally, its
technological level is 1, meaning it can hold only one technology.  Its
capacity of 3000 also means it can be used to store items, or even other
modules.  A module, built in a factory, may be delivered to an orbiting
structure by a ship with large enough hangar bays.  A ship may also move into
such a cargo bay, and be ferried anonymously across distances.

>> research lab [reslab]: This special research laboratory enables you to store
>>   many technologies, but also to drive research. If fully active, it adds 5%
>>   to your technology discover chance. Use the RESEARCH order to select a
>>   specific research direction. This is a research module. Size:500, crew:8,
>>   mass:400, energy:5, upkeep: $200, tech:0/10. Requires tech: advanced
>>   computing [advcomp].

This other module is very different. Again, it is a generic module which can be
installed in any settlement, outpost or spaceship.  The research lab works
automatically when powered, but you can direct its research to specific field.
It requires more crew, and stores up to 10 levels of technology in its computer
banks, i.e. 10 level 1 technologies, or 2 level 5 technologies.  It always
requires the advanced computing technology to build, so that level 1 technology
is automatically stored in the lab. You cannot choose to erase it.

>> Items:
>>
>> crew [crew]: This is the basic employee, which inhabits and works in your
>>   factories, spaceships and similar. A crew member requires 1 nutritive
>>   ration per month or runs the risk of falling dangerously ill. 10 stored in
>>   habitation modules. Weight:40, crew:0/1, upkeep: $15.

Finally, you have "items", which are in various modules. Unlike modules, items
are freely exchanged between modules, subject to their housing restrictions.
Most items can be stored in their respective module types, or in cargo modules.
Crew is an exception: crew members can be "stored" only in habitation modules,
never as cargo.


3. Detailed rules

The following chapters explain the various rules of Alderson in full detail.


3.1. Interests

Each player in Alderson controls an interest, which may represent a
corporation, a shipful of explorers, a huge military arm, or all of the above.
Each module (see below) belongs to a specific concern, and you will receive a
full detailed report on all your modules.  As long as one single module belongs
to your interest, you are active within the game.  If all your modules are
destroyed, you may opt to use your credit line to build another starting
position from somewhere, or to erase your existing interest and start afresh as
a new player.

Interests begin with a credit line.  That credit line may be spent before the
beginning of the game, to purchase modules that will make an initial interest,
select a more specific starting position, and acquire some basic technologies.
See the companion startup kit document for a list of these pre-game purchases.
The amount of your pre-game purchases is deduced from your initial credit.
Beware; overspending in the pre-game is a sure road to bankruptcy when you
start playing.

3.1.1. Interest characteristics

Each interest has the following characteristics:

- A unique game id, typically two letter and two digits.
- A full name, which appears before your interest ID in all reports.
- An email name, to which all reports are posted.
- A password, which is used to validate the orders received for the interest.

Except for the game ID, all these characteristics may be changed at all times,
using global orders.

3.1.2. Interest diplomacy

Interests may hold specific diplomatic stances toward other interests.  There
are five separate diplomatic stances, ranking from the worst to the most
friendly:

- Enemy. If you declare someone enemy, all your attack-capable ships, stations
  and settlements will open fire on all identifiable enemy units. Enemy also
  covers the interdictions of hostile stance.

- Hostile. If you declare someone hostile, you will prevent him from using any
  available resources, short of firing on it. The owner of an area will always
  prevent the construction of units and the exploitation of resources.

- Neutral. Neutral means neither enemy, nor specially authorised units.  You
  will allow a neutral unit to be built in areas you control, and will prevent
  the exploitation of resources only in non-terran, non-gas giant planets you
  control.  Exploitation is allowed in terran planets, or space.

- Friendly. Friendly means that you will allow all actions from other units,
  including the exploitation of resources.  You will also allow docking of any
  friendly unit into cargo ferries, bases and the landing in settlements you
  control.  You will defend any attack on friendly units in areas you control.
  Transfer of items between friends is allowed.

- Ally. Ally includes all that friendly supposes, and more.  Ally allows you to
  accept specific modules from another player into your units.  Also, in the
  event of an attack, your units will always defend or join in the attack at
  the side of allies, depending on their combat status.

In all stances, another unit is allowed to transfer you a technology, unless an
enemy.

Note that stances may be declared against an interest in general, or against
a specific unit in particular.  Stances apply to all your units, regardless of
their position in the galaxy.

Two specific stances, called the default stance, and the unknown stance, apply
respectively to all units for which no specific stance has been declared,
either for the unit itself or its interest, or whose affiliation is unknown.
Most interests start with a friendly or neutral default, and an hostile stance
against unknown units.


3.2. Units and modules

3.2.1. Units

A unit is a group of modules, built upon the umbrella of a starting module type
called a core.  Units constitute a complete whole, sharing automatically all
resources required by each component of the unit.

Units are what are visible on reports.  You do not know the details on a unit
separate modules, unless you have informers aboard, have a module aboard, a
unit of your own docked inside the structure, or a special technology that
allows you to get additional information.  In normal situations, the following
elements will be shown on a unit:

- The unique game ID of the unit
- A visual name for the unit
- The affiliation of the unit to the interest
- The unit's core module type
- The unit overall maximum size

Most core modules that make units are "opaque". You see the core module, and
nothing else.  Some modules are transparent and allow anyone to see all other
modules inside the unit as if they were core modules themselves.  These modules
are:

- The orbital complex (basic space station technology)
- The city (basic colonisation technology)
- all fleet models

A fleet is a specific type of unit.  It consumes no goods, requires no crew, no
energy, does not take space or mass.  It serves as a placeholder for other
space and starships that may join or leave the fleet at will.  A fleet will
move as a whole, and enjoy specific bonuses.  Typically, each ship in a fleet
adds 5% of its attack and defence factors to all the other ships in the fleet.
It is possible to declare a fleet between space stations and spaceships,  which
represents the spaceships standing patrol around the stations.  Such a fleet
will be unable to move, due to the space station presence.  It is also possible
to make a fleet with only space stations.  It is not possible to make a fleet
with a single unit; such a fleet automatically disappears at end of turn.

The affiliation announcement is a default setting, and any unit or module can
set a flag to shut down its transponder and hide its identity.  Doing so is a
mark of shady dealings and piracy, however, so most player will shoot down any
ship that disguises its affiliation, or invade any unchartered colony.


3.2.2. Modules

The term "module" alone, or "module template" is used to designate a module
type.  A "module copy" is any module constructed.  A "module slot" is a set of
identical module copies inside a unit.  For simplification purposes, when a
number of modules copies are put in a unit, these module copies are joined
together in a single module slot.

Modules slots in a unit represent the elementary piece of construction in your
interest domain.  Each performs a specific function, and has the following
characteristics:

- Name of the module. For the core module, this is the name of the unit.
  This is a visual name, and is used only in reports.
- Module unique game ID.  Core modules typically have a unique module ID that
  consists of digits only, while internal modules have a single letter,
  followed by digits.  When possible, the internal modules will pick the local
  core module number as part of their ID.
- Module affiliation.  This is the interest the module belongs to.  Upkeep of
  the module must be paid by the owner.
- Type of module.  There are many different modules that can be built.  Each
  will offer different base characteristics and allow different technologies to
  work.
- Number of modules.  For game purposes, all modules are strictly identical
  when installed, and the same unit may use a number of these modules.  The
  game will not allow the creation of a separate module slot if a module of the
  same type and interest affiliation already exists.  New modules copies are
  always added to the existing set.
- Items stored in the module.  Most modules have restrictions on the number and
  types of items that may be stored in them.
- Technologies stored in the module.  Most modules have restrictions on the
  total level of technologies they can hold, and sometimes requires a
  technology to be stored in them to work.  A module that lacks the required
  technology will not provide any benefit, but still require maintenance,
  energy, and crew.

Modules and module slots also have the following characteristics:

- Size, and capacity if any.  Core modules typically have a capacity, while
  most other modules have a size.  It is not possible to fit a total size
  greater than the core modules capacity.  Storage modules have both an
  external size and an internal capacity ; they occupy their external size,
  and may store up to their internal capacity.
- Crew requirements, and staff.  Habitat modules are used to host crew members,
  which in turn provide additional staff for the various tasks.  If you do not
  have enough crew members to fully staff a unit, performance will degrade
  quickly.  Most other modules require crew.
- Mass, and propulsion for ships.  All modules, except the fleet, have mass.
  Mass is irrelevant when a module is on ground, and mostly irrelevant in an
  orbital complex.  However, all modules have mass, which is counted when they
  are transported.  Propulsion modules are used to allow mass to move.
- Energy.  Most modules require some energy to power them.  Energy modules
  will consume fuel and provide energy.
- Technology level.  Each module may store a number of technology levels up to
  the indicated level.

Typically, these five numbers are specified for one module template.  Multiply
by the number of modules to get the final values for a slot.  The only
modification is for technology levels.  Additional module copies increase the
overall technology level by 1 or 1/3rd of their normal template value,
whichever is greater.

The following module types may be encountered:

- Station modules (core module).  These provide the base of space station.  A
  station module may be placed at any location within a system (it makes
  orbital stations around planets, asteroids, or in deep space).
- Spaceship modules (core module).  These provide the base of a space ship.
  A spaceship module may use the MOVE or JUMP orders to go from a location to
  another within a system or go thru alderson points.
- Settlement modules (core module).  These provide the base of a settlement,
  colony or outpost.  A settlement module may be placed only on a planet, or
  planetoid and never on a gas giant.
- Command modules.  These activate some functions within a station, ship or
  settlement.
- Habitat modules.  These provide room for crew members.
- Energy modules.  These provide energy for units.
- Propulsion modules.  These provide propulsion for star and space ships.
- Storage modules.  These provide either a place for storage of items, or a
  holding place for other units.
- Harvesting modules.  These allow a unit to harvest a resource.
- Manufacturing modules.  These allow a unit to transform one or more
  items into other items, or modules.
- Information modules.  These allow technologies to be stored in large
  amount, or to be researched.
- Fleet modules (core module).  A fleet module allow a number of space units to
  group under a single leadership.  The fleet module switches automatically its
  interest affiliation to the same interest affiliation as the first unit in
  the group, and disappear if no units are in the fleet.  Fleet may issue the
  order MOVE if it comprises space ships.

Other modules may appear, if you have special technologies to build them.  Some
module may contradict those rules, in which case the module description takes
precedence over the rule.


3.3. Technology

Technologies drive the game.  They are the key to success and progress.  Each
technology you master increase your possibilities, and allows you to develop
better units.  But this may cause you costly refits, to upgrade to the latest
and best technology can buy!

3.3.1. Technology categorisation

There are three broad categories of technologies:

- Basic technology.  All interests have mastery of these basic technologies.
  For simplicity's purpose, these do not occupy any storage in modules, and may
  be used any time, any place.  See the companion document for the list of
  these basic technologies.  All basics indicate a technology level of 0.

- New technologies.  These technologies may be used immediately once discovered
  and applied in the appropriate areas.

- Improved technologies.  These technologies improve on another technology, and
  may only be used if you have the appropriate, more basic technology available
  somewhere in the unit.  It is not required to have the technology in the
  same module slot, only in a module slot of the same interest within the unit.

Technologies come in three different flavours:

- Building technologies allow you to build a specific type of module.

- Manufacturing technologies allow you to transform a specific item into a
  different item, or to harvest a specific item.

- Enabling technologies allow a specific benefit when in a specific type of
  module.

A given technology always offers one of these flavours.  Some of the best
technologies offer two at the same time.  Each technology description indicates
how it is used.  Enabling technologies typically says "... If loaded in a X
module,...". Other technologies are simply USEd (see USE order).

Finally, each technology has a technology level, which indicates its overall
complexity.  There is no specific relationship between a technology level and
its being a new, improved, building or enabling technology; the level reflects
the amount of computing power required to use the technology.  Some
improvements are very simple, while some new technologies may be hideously
complex to implement.  Some technologies may rise to tech level 15 or greater!

A technology too large to fit within a module will not provide enabling
benefits.  In the same manner, a building or manufacturing technology cannot
be USEd if it does not fit.  This kind of storage is considered an emergency
and temporary measure.


3.3.2. Technology transfer

Technologies may be transferred from one module slot to another using the order
COPY.  A module slot may always store one technology, regardless of the
module's level and the technology level, unless it has no technology level
(such as some core modules).  However, if the technology stored does not fit
within the module, a COPY will perform a transfer; the existing copy will be
erased as soon as the order is processed.

A technology can be ERASEd from a module at will.  A ship, colony or station
in a dangerous position may thus attempt to wipe all its files prior to a raid
to avoid dangerous technologies falling into the hand of pirates or enemy
military.  Of course, if the attack finally fails, the hapless unit may find
itself with big problems as most of its instrumentation fails.

There is no limit to the total amount of technologies you may store in a unit,
subject to the individual module limitations.  There is also no limit to the
amount of technologies your interest knows overall.  The number of available
technologies is rather large.

At some level, you will approach Transcendence.  Transcendence isn't covered in
these rules; the game master will forward you the specific rules covering the
Transcendence if you get the message "You are approaching Transcendence" in
your report...  Transcendence occurs when you start mastering almost all
technologies, and discover new technologies faster than you can put them to
use.


3.3.3. Technology acquisition

There are different ways of getting technologies.

You may start with some technologies purchased from the initial list of
technologies available at startup.

You may trade with another player for technologies of interest.  The EXCHANGE
order allows you to trade technologies, i.e. give a technology if another
technology is received in trade.  This works only if the technology being
received is not already stored in the unit, so it is impossible to slip in a
tech you already have.  It is perfectly possible to give a technology that is
very different from the one you expected.

You may purchase technologies at locations that sell them.  The SELL and BUY
orders allow you to specify a technology for sale.  The default for selling
and buying is 1 copy of the technology, and cannot be changed.  However, one
can sell repeatedly the same technology to multiple players, as the sold
technology remains in storage.  If a purchase occurs, the technology is
downloaded as in an EXCHANGE order.

You may discover technologies in modules.  If you manage to acquire a module
which contains a technology, you may then copy and disseminate this technology
to all your units.  Rumors exist about ruins of pre-historic galactic
civilisations and the technologies they mastered before mankind accessed the
star lanes.

Finally, you may receive reports on technologies you have not mastered, because
you have information about the technology.  This is more likely to occur if
you have a module slot in a shared unit, and gain information on the other
interests' technologies.


3.3.4. Research

Finally, you may discover technologies through research.  Research occurs
automatically each turn, and contributes to the technology advancement.  Each
settlement with enough space to store a technology and a population of at least
100 crew may find one.  You may only discover at most one technology each turn,
no matter how many research-capable units you have.  The discovered technology
will be stored in a 
location within the unit.

Each research module also offers a chance to find a technology, if that module
has enough space to store new technologies.  Unlike settlements, discoveries
are made by the module itself, and are not stored anywhere else, hence the
space requirements.  Research module will enable a space-based unit to find
technologies.  A research module does not require a minimum crew in the unit.

Each type of module and location present will contribute differently to the
possibility of finding a specific technology.  Thus, if you have large
factories, you will have a higher probability of finding processing techniques;
if you have lots of farming settlements, you may find food-related improvement,
and if you are lots of military defence and weapons in your habitats, you will
find newer ways of doing warfare.  Habitat modules contribute only 1/2 their
size to the technology type random selection.

Each module contributes 1% to the probability of finding a technology at that
location. Each 20 unoccupied crew will also add 1%, up to a total limit of 70%
per turn at each location.  Research modules will add a larger % to that
chance, and their bonus may rise the overall probability up to 80%.  No matter
how much effort you put in research, you cannot have more than 80% chance of
finding a new technology in any given unit.

A research module may use the RESEARCH order to skew this distribution.  If
used for RESEARCH, the module adds only half its normal % of chances of
discovery, but will modify the distribution of technologies that can be found.
If you RESEARCH, you have 50% chance of finding a technology in the area you
directed your research to.

You may only RESEARCH on locally available items, structures, modules, or known
technologies.  RESEARCH requires you to specify:

- An item; research will find a way to produce, use, or affect that item (crews
  are in the item category).
- A module; research will find a way to manufacture that module, a technology
  that can be used in it, or failing that, a technology related to the same
  module category (manufacturing a module of the same category, typically).
- A technology; research will find an improvement on that technology.  This
  produce only 33% chances of finding an improvement, should any exist, instead
  of the 50% for other types of research.
- A feature; research will find a technology related to that feature, typically
  a module that works at that feature, or can be installed at a base at that
  feature.  The unit containing the research module must remain in location for
  the full quarter to make use of this.

You may also set the flag MUTE to avoid having a module contributing to the
research effort.  Such a muted module will not add any % of chance of finding
a technology, nor contribute to the distribution of technologies.


3.3.5. Unexplored features

If scouting far from the known star lanes, you will find unexplored features.
An unexplored feature yield a 10% research bonus the first time it is targeted
for research, which adds to the research module normal bonuses (it is subject
to the 80% cap).  If a starship has spent a full turn at the feature, it will
no longer be unexplored, regardless of RESEARCH.  The same occurs after a
station or settlement has been built at that feature.

Unexplored features are denoted by a "unexplored" mention on the report.

Sometimes, instead of yielding RESEARCH results, the feature will reveal a
derelict module, left by a "somebody".  That module may have one or more
technologies loaded in it.  These technologies can be copied to the exploring
ship, or the module loaded.  If the module is loaded or installed in the ship,
it will switch its interest to you.  The module description will always be
included in your report when you discover it.


3.4. Working units

3.4.1. Starting a unit

A unit is started by making, or ferrying core modules to an assembly place.
All modules copies are built in a factory, loaded with the proper technology,
and from the specified building materials.  That factory delivers the module
copy at a target.  You may specify the following targets as an argument to the
"USE technology" instruction by a factory:

- No argument: the module will be stored in a hangar bay or any storage
  facility within the same unit as the producing factory.  If there is no room
  available, the module production will be deferred, except for core modules.
  Core modules will then be placed at the same location as the producing unit,
  i.e. in orbit for space cores, or on ground for settlement cores.  If a core
  module is built, the unit uses that core module type, and the core allows
  additional copies to be added, then the core module is added to the unit by
  default.

- An existing module ID: one module will be added to the amount of modules that
  is specified.  If the module being built is different, or if you are adding a
  core module to a unit that cannot accept core modules, production will be
  deferred.

  If you specify a core module ID, and produce a module that can fit within the
  core type, the module copy will be added inside the core module, to the given
  module slot if any exists, or making a new group of modules.

  If you specify a storage module ID, the module will be stored inside the
  storage module.

- A new module ID: such an ID is made using your interest ID, followed by the
  letter 'N', then by a two-digit number.  That module ID may be used in all
  instructions to refer to the newly made module.  The special command RECEIVE
  can be used by a core or storage module to specify where the module will be
  added.  This is similar to the previous behaviour, except that you can
  immediately refer to the module created, for example to place crew inside
  newly added crew quarters, or place fuel in energy modules.

  You may also use that new ID in your order form to start immediately giving
  orders to your new unit ID.


3.4.2. Building multiple modules

The technology description indicates what is required to build a module, and
the time required to build it.  This time refers to the work done by a single
factory loaded with the proper program.  That time may be reduced by placing
multiple factories in parallel.  For simplification purposes, adding four new
factory modules to the existing single module copy will divide by five the time
needed to build any module; there is no efficiency lost or gained for larger
structures.

If the time required to build a module is less than a full turn, the same
factory complex may build one or more modules of the same type, or many modules
of differing types.  If production switches, any partially completed module
copy will remain on the factory ground.  Such a partial module takes a mass
that is proportional to the amount of work done, but does not require upkeep to
be paid.

Producing a number of modules that is not a common multiple of the number of
your factory modules may lead to inefficiency.  If, for example, you have four
factories linked together, and want to produce a single module that requires
three weeks for a single factory to assemble, one module will be produced in a
week, and the fourth factory will remain idle.  The idle factory still require
its crew and power.


3.4.3. Towing modules

When a module is built in a storage module, it remains inactive and unpowered.
It does not require crew, power and the maintenance upkeep of the module is
minimal : a flat $5 is required for all inactive modules.  The module may then
be TRANSFERred from one storage module to another - this is the equivalent of
placing the module in orbit, or bringing it down using shuttles.  A spaceship
with its hold containing modules may then move, and bring them along,
delivering the module to the final assembly place.

The module may then be TRANSFERed to a core module for insertion, or into an
existing module of the same type.  It will then be added in a manner similar to
the direct construction of the module in place.

Note that placing and towing storage modules in storage modules of the same
type poses a specific problem.  It is not possible to tow modules by
specifying the storage module as a target for either building (USE tech) or
TRANSFER commands, since it can be interpreted as either placing the module in
storage, or adding to the existing structure.  For this reason, the ambiguity
is cleared by the following rules:

- If a module of the same type is TRANSFERed or built directly on a module of
  the same type, it is added to the group of modules if there is enough room
  in the unit for it, or added inside the storage module if there is not enough
  room in the unit to add one.

- To ensure the storage of the module, the storing module may issue the RECEIVE
  command, specifying a new unit ID.  TRANSFER or construction may then be done
  into the newly created storage place.

A module automatically activates once placed below a core unit.  To keep it
inactive, it must be kept in storage.  The core also automatically activates
once a module is placed inside it.


3.4.4. Making a working unit

A working unit requires only that its three main requirements are satisfied:

- There must be enough space in the core module to support all modules stored
  inside, and all items stored in these modules.  If the core module does not
  satisfy these requirements, adding a new module or item will fail.

- There must be enough crew to satisfy all crew requirements of modules.  Any
  extra crew will work on maintenance, lowering the maintenance costs of the
  unit, and will be available, should a problem cause the death of a crew
  member.  Crew members may be supplied by modules belonging to differing
  interests.

- There must be enough energy to power all modules.  Any extra energy will be
  wasted and lost.

If not enough energy is available in a space unit, the following modules
will be shut down, in order:

- all other modules
- factory modules
- extraction modules
- military modules
- propulsion modules
- command modules
- farming modules
- crew modules

You can also issue the SHUT order to shut down a module and preserve energy.
If energy cannot be supplied to crew modules, each crew module unpowered will
risk the death of each crew member in 33% of the time, crew members being
rolled separately.

If two ships of the same interest, or whose interests are allied to each other
are in a formation (fleet), a fully powered ship will be able to supply energy
to an unpowered one if none are moving.

If not enough crew is available, all modules will work with an efficiency that
is lowered by double the percentage of missing crew members.  Thus, a ship
staffed at 90% will have all its modules working at only 80% efficiency.
Modules working at lower efficiency will do exactly that: attack and defence
will be lowered by the appropriate factor, energy will be supplied only
according to the appropriate factor, the engine will be slower...


For settlements, the same rules apply if the settlement is one on an hostile
(non-terran) planet.  For terran planets (settlements and cities), death in
unpowered habitation quarters do not occur.  Crew members living in unpowered
crew quarters will instead require a 50% higher pay.


3.4.5. Activating units

Unlike ground-based settlements, space-based units, such as starships or space
stations, require command modules to work.  There must be at least 1 command
module in a space unit, and 1 command module is required for each 15 modules
in the unit, rounded down (so, only 1 command module is required up to 29
modules in a unit).  If the unit lacks command modules, it will work only at
half efficiency: energy production is halved, crew requirements are doubled,
and all factory or extraction modules produce only at half speed.

For spaceships, the first command module must be a command bridge module.  If
the unit lacks a command bridge, it will be unable to move at all.  Other
command modules for very large ships may be of any command type.

Ground-based units have no module requirements.


3.4.6. Shared units

A unit is said to be "shared" if it contains active modules from different
interests.  In that case, it is possible to have separate module slots that
appear for the same module templates; each belonging to a different interest.

The following additional rules apply to such shared units:

- There can be only one core slot. It is not possible to have multiple core
  module slots from different interests.

- Your modules will draw upon crew members staying in your own crew quarters
  first, then upon any remaining free crew quarters.  This may cause different
  modules to function at different efficiency rates.

- Any free crew members will reduce the upkeep of your own modules first, then
  the upkeep of the rest of the unit in normal order.

- You pay for your own module upkeep and the crew members staying in your own
  quarters.

- Your modules will automatically draw from modules of your interest only.  A
  power plant will not draw upon a different interest production stored in an
  extraction, factory or storage module for example.

- You always see the interior of a shared unit, including all modules and their
  contents, as long as you have one module slot belong to your interest.  This
  include all items, power/crew/weight requirements, but does not include the
  loaded technologies in each module.

- You always get a report on the location of the unit and its moves, regardless
  of your position or contribution within the unit.

- If an interest in the unit has a technology loaded in one of its module slots
  you do not know about, you have 80% chances, divided by the technology level,
  of getting a report on that technology.  You do not acquire that technology,
  nor its origin within the shared unit, only knowledge of its existence and
  purpose.  You may derive rumors on one technology per shared unit at most.

- If the overall unit satisfies the criteria for finding new technologies, each
  interest within the shared unit has a separate chance of finding a
  technology.  The chances of finding a technology are equal to the normal
  contribution of your modules and idle crew, plus 10% of the other interests'
  individual technology contribution.  Each interest represented in the shared
  unit may find a technology, provided it has enough memory to store the
  technology.  It is possible that all interests will each find a different
  technology.

  The use of the RESEARCH order to orient technology research applies only to
  the interest using the RESEARCH.

- The diplomatic status will not interefere with the working of the unit,
  except in the following cases:
  * Exchange of items and technologies is still subject to restrictions.
  * The ship engines will refuse to provide propulsion if the core of the ship
    is considered hostile or worse.  This prevents any use of the MOVE or JUMP
    orders.
  * Any active (i.e. requiring power and crew) military module and command
    modules will not contribute to the defense or offense rating of a ship if
    the core module slot is considered hostile or worse.

  No attacks are ever made within the same unit.

3.4.7. Docked units

Units are considered docked if an active unit is stored in a storage module
large enough to contain its current size.  Docked units are still considered
separate units, except that:

- Excess power will be provided by the units, containing or docked, that have
  a surplus to the units that do not have enough.  Excess energy will not be
  added to the containing unit if it does not require it.

  Other contributions do not apply, except that the mass of the docked unit is,
  of course, added to the containing unit.

- In the event of a battle, the docked units will detach themselves from the
  dock and join the fight.  They will lose their first round, during which they
  cannot fire nor be fired upon, and will have an effective maneuverability of
  0.01 during the second round of the battle.

  If the containing unit is entirely destroyed during the first round of fire,
  any excess damage will be applied to the docked ships, randomly.

- Docked units do not require an extra upkeep; they pay the normal 100% upkeep
  indicated on the report for the duration of their stay in the docks (see
  3.6).


3.5. Movement

There are three ways of moving a unit within the Alderson universe.

3.5.1. Cargo

The easiest way is to place a unit within another, larger unit.  This is
possible for any space unit, be it a ship or station, provided the unit has
cargo bays large enough.  The other unit may then move normally.  Ground-based
settlements cannot be uprooted and moved in that manner.

3.5.2. Intra-system movement

Intra-system movement is available only for ships (spaceships and starships),
provided they have working engines and fuel if required.  A ship engine are
capable of moving a specific mass, which is compared to the mass of the ship.
Ships with a larger engine capacity than their total mass will move faster,
in proportion of the engine overcapacity.  Ships with too much mass will move
slower, in proportion of the over-mass.  The following formula is simple:

- Effective speed = normal speed times engine capacity divided by mass

Thus, if you have a capacity for 10000 mass, but your ship mass only 5000,
it will move twice faster.  Conversely, a 20000 mass ship with 10000 engines
would move twice slower.

Movement occurs between any two points of a solar system using the MOVE
command.  The time for travel is normally complex, depending on relative
orbital points.  For simplicity's sake, the time for travel between any two
points located at N U.A. and M U.A. respectively would be:

       N - M   N + M
Time = ----- + -----  (assuming that N is greater than M)
        2.5     30

The first factor represents the difference between orbits, while the second
factor represents the differing positions on the same orbit.  This is not
supposed to be an exact representation of celestial mechanics.

After multiplying by the effective speed, the overall result is rounded to the
nearest integer value.  If the value ends up being exactly X.5, then X is
assumed.  The travel time can never be less than 1.

In the sample turn, movement between the various alderson points would require
2 weeks, while movement from the outer system to Mutorae II would require about
9 weeks.  A faster ship could cover this distance in a shorter time, but a
slow-moving cargo towing might require two or three turns to ferry something
toward Birgon station.  Its position is also now clearer: a trade station is
better positioned at the fringe of a system rather than inward, as merchant
will be leery of having to move to and from planets.

Systems with Alderson points in the inner system are rare and highly prized as
hubs for commerce.

3.5.3. Inter-system movement

Inter-system movement is done by moving through Alderson points.  You start
first by moving to a given Alderson point.  You may then use the JUMP command
to move from that point to the matching Alderson point in the destination
system.

JUMP lasts a fixed single week (it is considered including the last
calculations to find the exact point position in the jump zone, placing the
ship on an intersecting trajectory and manoevering around).


3.6. Upkeep

There are various forms of upkeep, or regular expenses, within Alderson.  Your
modules will all require maintenance, or may suffer degradation of performance.
Your crew will also expect to be paid.  Finally, your crew and population will
also expect to be fed, and engines fuelled.

3.6.1. Cash

You have galactic credits in two forms.  The first is your credit line, which
is immaterial and available at any imperial location or any location with the
appropriate technologies.  The second is by using "cash" items (tag "cash")
wherever you go.

Two categories of entities in the game require a payment of cash every turn.
Crew members require $15 per turn and per crew member.  That cash can come
from either the local cash or the credit line, even if the crew member is out
of civilised space.  It is assumed that the transfer between bank accounts
accumulate back pay, and the crew will get back its salary when back in the
civilised areas.

Modules also require an upkeep in cash, which represents work done and spare
parts required for the unit.  Unlike crew salaries, the cash must be accessible
from the system the unit is located in at the end of turn.  Access to the
credit line is granted if any imperial unit exists in the current system, or
one of your modules has the appropriate technology.  If the credit line is
unavailable, local cash is required.  Cash will be shared by all your units at
the same location.

It is possible to control from which source the upkeep comes by using the flag
SUPPORT which selects the credit line upkeep first over the hard cash for
module upkeep, and WIRE_SALARY which selects the credit line upkeep first over
the hard cash for crew.  The WIRE_SALARY must be set in the crew quarter
modules.  The default, if these flags are not set, is to use the local cash
first, then the credit line.

3.6.2. Maintenance

If a unit has more crew than the number required for all its modules, that crew
will contribute its work force by assuring some additional maintenance in the
unit.  Each extra crew member will reduce by $25 the upkeep of the unit, in
the order of modules in the unit.

Space-based units are more expensive than ground-based ones.  Any structure
in space costs an extra 25% over its indicated upkeep.  This is valid for all
modules that can be built in either space or planetary surfaces ; the upkeep of
the module is higher if based in a space base or ship.  The indicated upkeep of
space-only modules does not take these 25% into account, to avoid confusion.
Thus the upkeep of a space-based unit is 125% of the total of the sum of the
indicated upkeep of all modules.

A moving unit (ship) is also increased by another 25% for the time it spends
moving around.  If a ship is always moving for the full quarter, its effective
upkeep will then be 150% of the computed upkeep.  If it moves only 5 weeks
during the quarter the upkeep would be in proportion, i.e. 134.6% of the
standard upkeep.

A ship or structure that is docked (i.e. located in a hangar bay) pays normal
upkeep for that time, as the docking protect it from premature wear and tear
in space (no micro-meteorite pitting).

Finally, unconnected modules (i.e. modules that are not part of a unit) cost
only $5 per turn in upkeep.  This is valid for any unconnected module, or for
core modules who do not hold any other module yet.  As soon as two modules are
connected together, the normal upkeep (including space penalties) applies.  If
a unit begins the turn as a collection of loose, unconnected modules, and is
assembled during a turn, upkeep will be in proportion of the time as separate
modules and as functional units.

Note that crew members do not require extra salary while in space; their upkeep
remains what is indicated.

3.6.3. Lack of upkeep

Lack of upkeep cash affect crew and modules differently.  If cash is lacking to
pay the salaries, a random number of crew members, up to the amount that lacked
some cash (if $150 was available for example, at least 10 crew members will
never desert), may desert.  The probability of their desertion is equal to the
ratio between paid salary and required salaries.

If cash is lacking to maintain the various modules, damage will occur.  Each
damage indicator reduces the efficiency of one module copy by 5% (if 100%
damage accumulate in a single module, that module is shut down), and increase
the upkeep of the module by $10.

The probability of breakdown and damage is equal to the ratio between unpaid
maintenance and paid maintenance, and occurs for each module copy separately.
If breakdown occurs, one damage indicator is added to the module that turn.
This occur for each module copy (a crew quarter of 5 modules may have up to 5
damage occurring) separately.

If full maintenance is paid, one damage indicator will be removed from the unit
per core module each turn.  The only way to repair faster is to use the repair
technology at a suitable location.

3.6.4. Item upkeep

Unlike cash upkeep, items are consumed at the start of each turn.  If the
required items are available, they are consumed.  If they cannot be, the module
usually shuts down for the turn.

Food upkeep for crew members is different.  If not enough food is available,
the crew will not work (it will not contribute to the unit's function, nor
contribute to maintenance), require an additional $5 in salary, and may die if
not in a terran planet.  On settlement on terran planets, each starving crew
member has 5% chance of deserting.  Out of terran planets, or in orbital bases
or ships around terran planets, each starving crew has 25% chance of dying.

If not enough food is available in a given unit, all units of the same interest
at the same location will attempt to transfer enough food to satisfy all crews.

3.6.5. Reaction requirements

Finally, reaction drives require some reaction mass to work.  All reaction
drives indicate how many items are required per week of function and copy of
the module.  Movement require the amount of items.  If not enough items are
available, the movement will be impossible.  If movement has started, and the
reaction mass isn't available anymore, movement continues, but the ship will be
unable to decelerate and stop at the destination.


3.7. Credit line

Your credit line is very important.  It represents the cash that is managed by
the various banking concerns across all civilisations.  Unlike cash objects,
which may be taken during raids, your credit line cannot be hacked - or so
assure all banks.

The credit line may be used instead of liquid cash at any system where an
imperial structure exists.  These locations are supposed to provide elementary
banking services.  The WITHDRAW order allows you to convert cash from the
credit line into cash items at a $1 for $1 rate.  Also, when buying from an
imperial unit, an automatic withdraw will be performed if you do not have
enough cash to pay for your purchase.

For security reasons, the bank will not allow you to deposit cash back onto
your credit line.  Once you have emptied your credit, you must do without the
bank.  To compensate for this, an automatic amount of cash is wired to your
credit line each turn, which represents your day-to-day finantial activities
within the imperium.  You get an automatic $3000 each turn, which is enough to
cover a basic settlement and a ship upkeep and crew requirements.  Any
additional cash will have to come from other sources.

Some technologies allow you to build your own bank terminal, and withdraw
anywhere, even if no imperial unit is present in the system.  Others even
allow you to store cash in a bank, or to wire directly between player credit
lines.


3.8. Battle

There are different kinds of battle, depending on your objectives.  You may
order an attack on an enemy unit or fleet using the following orders:

- DESTROY.  Your objective is the total destruction of the enemy unit.  Should
  you win, nothing will remain of the enemy.  This is the easiest battle.
- CAPTURE.  Your objective is the capture of the enemy ship with the least
  possible damage.  If all goes well, you might end up with the ship under
  control.
- PLUNDER.  An intermediate form.  You will try to salvage as many modules as
  possible, but will not consider yourself very concerned about overall
  integrity; your objective is parts, not working unit.

These apply to explicit orders.  Implicit attacks may also occur, when you
identify an enemy unit.  Your combat setting (see TACTICS) determine which type
of attack you'll attempt: DESTROY or CAPTURE.  It is not possible to select a
PLUNDER attack for automatic attacks.  All attacking units use the same type of
combat.

The defenders in a battle each have a separate objective, according to their
tactical settings.  If no special attack setting has been selected, the
defender will do a DESTROY battle.


3.8.1. Military factors

Each ship has an attack and defence factor, as reported overall.  Your attack
and defence are simply the sum of all the factors from your various modules,
plus 10% of the unused energy supply for the attack, over your ship potential
and actual size.  For better understanding, each factor is described by the
formula:

                                      10000
factor = sum of module factors * --------------- + fleet bonus
                                 max size + size

The fleet bonus is the sum of the cooperating factors from the rest of the
fleet.  Those cooperating factors are the factors from each other ship, fleet
bonus excluded, times the fleet percentage factor.  The numbers indicated in
parentheses for each unit on the core module are the final factors with all
contributions factored in.

For a ground location, the factor is equal to:

                                  25000
factor = sum of module factors * --------
                                 max size

There is no possibility of a fleet bonus, and the current size of the unit is
not taken into account, only its maximum size.

This decides a ship, station or ground city defence and attack factors.  To
these factors is added a manoeuverability factor, which is equal to the ratio
of your engine power over your mass, times the ratio of your energy supply
over your energy requirements.

             Engines   Power supply           Damage
Maneuvers =  ------- * ------------ * ( 1 - --------- )
              Mass        Energy            Structure

Fixed units (stations, ground sites) have an arbitrary ratio of engine/mass
of 0.1 only.  Moving ships with a ratio of engine over mass inferior to 0.1
are considered to have 0.1 too.  There is also an upper limit of 10 to the
ratio of engine over mass.  The same 0.1 and 10 limits apply to the power
supply available over energy consumed ratios.  Some technologies may alter this
factor.

The battle is then resolved until the objective specified in the attack is
achieved, all units on one side are destroyed, the attacking units are routed,
or the defending units escape.

All ships have a structure factor, which is equal to the current size.

3.8.2. Engagement

The battle proper is divided into rounds.  Each round, all the ships involved
will act in the order of decreasing manoeuverability.  Each ship has the
opportunity to first attempt to escape the battle, if this is selected as its
tactical setting.  A ship rolls on the sum of its manoeuverability plus 20% of
all its own side manoeuverability, against the sum of all the enemy side
manoeuverability.  If the roll is successful, the ship escapes battle and can
no longer be hit.  A single ship against a whole fleet will have a hard time to
escape.

If a ship fails to escape or does not try to escape, it will then attempt to
fire.  It selects a target using its tactical setting and fires on it.  It
then rolls on the sum of its attack plus the target ship defence.  If the roll
is less or equal to the defence, this attack has failed.  If not, the enemy
ship hits.  Each point above the defence factor counts as one damage.  This
damage is multiplied by 500, and is recorded.

All ships thus escape or fire in order.  At the end of the round, all ships add
any damage they suffered to their damage total.  A ship is destroyed and can no
longer fight or act in any way once it has accumulated more damage than its
structure.

If ships remain on both sides of the battle, the manoeuver factor is readjusted
according to the damage suffered, and the battle proceed anew.

3.8.3. Special objectives

The rules of engagement above are for the most basic battle, i.e. a battle to
DESTROY.  PLUNDER and CAPTURE battles have small variations to this model.

3.8.3.1. Plunder ship, settlement or bases

In a PLUNDER battle, the damage hits are 350 in size instead of 500.  However,
each block of 350 damage is applied not to the target as a whole, but to one
random module for each lump of damage.  The modules slots are chosen at random
in proportion to their size.  A module is destroyed once it has accumulated
more damage than its own size, and will not accumulate more damage.

The target is disabled and stops fighting once the core modules are fully
destroyed and the command modules have sustained at least 50% damage, or the
power modules are fully destroyed.  If the opposing unit had no command
modules, the destruction of the core suffices.  A unit without command modules
will be disabled once its core or power modules are destroyed.

Once a target is disabled, it will no longer be the target of any ships in
battle, nor attack any other.

All remaining modules then roll for destruction.  A module has a probability
equal to its damage over its size to suffer fatal destruction.  If that
destruction happen, one copy of the module is removed, along with the
appropriate amount of damage, and the process repeats if any copies of the
module remain.

Any surviving modules will be loaded in cargo bays of surviving units of the
winning side.  All extra modules that could not be loaded will either remain in
their core module, if any module survived, or in a special "wreck" core module
that replaces the destroyed core (keeping the same ID).  Modules loaded in
cargo bays will belong to the unit's owner, while modules in the wreck will
belong to no interest at all.

3.8.3.2. Capture ship, settlement or bases

Static units (settlements and bases) cannot attempt a CAPTURE.

In a CAPTURE battle, the damage hits are 100 in size instead of 500.  Each
block of damage is applied to a module, as in a PLUNDER battle.  Command
modules have a double probability of getting hit.

The target is disabled and stops fighting once the command modules have
sustained 60% damage or higher, or the core modules are fully destroyed, or
the power modules are fully destroyed.  For units without a command module,
the capture occurs when 30% damage has been inflicted overall.

If the target had its core modules fully destroyed, it is a wreck, and the
process of PLUNDER described above will occur.  If the target was not wrecked,
any fully destroyed module is erased, and all surviving modules get damage
indicators in proportion of their damage.

If the target was not wrecked, the core, command and crew quarters will be
converted to the interest of one of the winning units.  A random amount of
25-75% of the crew members will survive and belong to the new owner.  All
remaining modules remain owned by the previous owner, which will not pay upkeep
for the captured module.  Other modules must be individually converted using
the CONVERT order, otherwise, the module will remain connected using ansible
links through the Alderson wormholes and its interest get reports.  Crew must
be filled, if necessary, and repair effected if possible.  Captured modules
cannot execute orders, but still report to their original interest until
converted.


3.9. Outlaws

In some circumstances, the Imperium may decide to declare your interest a Rogue
Interest, or outlawed interest, and calls for your disband.  A reward of $1500
is given for the destruction of any rogue unit, be it ship or settlement.

If you are declared rogue, the Imperium will seize your assets, and cancel your
credit line.  You cannot access the credit line anymore, nor can you receive
the fixed $3000 quarterly funds.  The Imperium will also declare you enemy,
and will attempt to destroy any of your units it may.

The Imperium always issue a proclamation of this declaration one turn in
advance.  You, and every player in the game (except rogues) gets the
notification on the report.  Your credit line is then liquidated at the end of
the first week on the next quarter, and you are declared enemy the next week
(you just have time to liquidate your assets).  Once declared enemy, you can't
ever go back.

After this happens, you have to find out a way of getting supporting upkeep.
The reason for your classification in Rogue Interests is reported.

Interest may DECLARE an attitude over ROGUE, which is basically an up-to-date
copy of the rogue list.  If you are rogue yourself, your attitude vs rogues is
meaningless, as you no longer have access to the rogue list.

If you declare an attitude against an interest that is declared rogue, and a
default attitude against rogues, the specific attitude takes precedence over
the more general one.

3.9.1. Piracy conviction

The first way of being declared rogue is being convicted of piracy.  There is
different ways of being convicted of piracy:

- Having one of your ships captured after an attack
- Having one of your ships doing an attack while not under transponder silence
- Having one of your ships doing an attack, having one unit escape the attack
  or survive the attack, and having that ship being later identified as
  belonging to your interest

Being attacked never counts as piracy.  Attacking a declared rogue ship or
interest never counts as piracy.

If only some units are being suspected of piracy, but your interest could not
be identified, you will escape piracy conviction.  The Imperium will publish
a list of individual rogue ships.

3.9.2. Rogue complicity

Once an interest is declared rogue, the Imperium expects you to consider that
interest as at least unfriendly.  If the Imperium can see an interest dealing
with a known rogue (either a rogue ship or a rogue interest) in a manner that
indicate a neutral or better attitude, the Imperium will inflict you a penalty
of $6000 the first time (your automated subsidy is withdrawn for two turns).
If you are caught dealing with rogues a second time, you are declared rogue
yourself.

Again, a silent ship dealing with rogues will simply be declared rogue itself
if its controlling interest remains unknown.

3.9.3. Outlaw technology

The third way of being declared rogue is to harbor or use outlawed techs.  Some
technologies are declared outlawed technologies by the Imperium.  When you
discover such a technology, its description will indicate an outlaw index.
Your faction, as long as it knows an outlawed technology, has an outlaw factor,
which is the sum of the outlaw indexes.  When that outlaw factor goes over a
certain limit, the Imperium will declare you a rogue.  When you go over 80% of
that limit, the Imperium will address you a notice that you are treading on
dangerous grounds.

When you not only master these technologies, but apply them (load them into the
proper modules, produce the modules they allow to build, or produce the items
they allow to produce) in public, you get a double amount of outlaw points for
that technology.  Wiping out the technology from your databases does not wipe
out those added outlaw points; you also need to destroy the outlawed items or
modules.

Loading outlawed technologies in a spaceship, or storing outlawed items in a
spaceship does not constitute the use of the technology in public, unless the
spaceship is a shared unit with an Imperial module present.  Using an outlawed
module consists a public use of the technology in any unit.

Unsurprisingly, the more interesting a technology, the higher its outlaw
factor potential.


4. Orders

The report includes a template for your instructions. You may simply use the
reply command of your mail tool to send back this template, properly filled.

The email address is <server@alderson.frmug.org>.  Various commands may be sent
to the server.  All commands have the following form:
	#xxxxxxx interest-id interest-password ...

The first two parameters of the command are fixed, and represent your unique
interest ID, as assigned by the game server, and your own password.  The
initial password is selected when you register, but may be changed at any time.
Alternatively, any valid unit-ID of your interest may be used as a replacement
for the interest ID.

The following commands are available:

- #GAME
  Indicates a turn instructions submission.  This cancels and replaces any
  previously submitted instruction list.  This is valid for the current turn.
  A simple, generic turn checker will evaluate your instructions, and report on
  their syntax and possible consequences.  Do not put too much faith in the
  effects reported, as the checker does not simulate a full turn.

- #PRESS
  Indicates a turn press submission.  This adds an article, signed in a
  non-forgeable manner to the player-published turn newspaper.  Multiple
  submissions are individually added.  The article is signed by the submittor,
  i.e. your interest overall, or the specific unit referred to.  If a unit has
  submitted press, its interest is not disclosed.

- #RUMOR
  Indicates a turn press submission.  This adds a completely anonymous article
  to the player-published turn newspaper.  Multiple submissions are
  individually added.

- #TURN
  Ask for a turn report.  A third argument is required; the turn number must be
  specified.  The server will return you the report for your interest on the
  given turn, if any remains archived.

  Alternatively, it is possible to check the WWW site for reports:
	http://alderson.frmug.org/pbm/Alderson/xxxxx/
  where xxxxx is your interest ID.  This site requires authentication.  Simply
  specify your interest ID and password to access information.  Each player
  entry contains the turn reports, the lastest instruction list received, and
  the checker's output for that instruction list.

Alternatively, it is possible to send a message to xxxxx@alderson.frmug.org,
where xxxxx is any entity, interest, unit or individual module, within the
Alderson game universe.  The entire content of the message is forwarded, along
with your email address, unless the first non-blank line of the message is the
specific command #FROM.  In that case, the From: line of your message will be
replaced by the appropriate address thru the alderson server, providing a good
anonymous forwarding service. The syntax of the #FROM is:

- #FROM interest-id|unit-id interest-password

Anonymous senders are advised to check carefully their message for any
signature, or specific information, that could be used to identify themselves.

All commands forwarded to the game server end at a line with #END.


4.1. Turn instructions

Instructions are divided by categories. You have roughly three categories:

- Immediate instructions.  These instructions happen immediately, as soon as
  the conditions required for their execution are fulfilled.  As many
  instructions as can be executed will be considered each game week.

- Long instructions.  One long instruction will be executed each week.  The
  first instruction occurring in the instruction list that has all the
  conditions required for its execution satisfied will be selected.  If an
  instruction lasts more than one week, it will last the required amount of
  time, unless otherwise specified.  Movement instructions cannot be
  interrupted, but any other instruction may be, if another long instruction
  located before it in the instruction list becomes valid during the turn.

- Turn instructions.  A special case of the long instruction.  Turn
  instructions fill an entire game quarter.  These instructions will start only
  on the 1st week of the game quarter, and fill all 13 weeks.  Turn
  instructions cannot be interrupted.

Immediate instructions on one side, and long/turn instructions on the other
side are considered independently.  Immediate instructions located well after
an unexecuted long instruction will still considered.  Only conditionals will
cause immediate and long instructions to depend on each other.

Any space at the beginning of a line is ignored.  Anything prefixed by either
the `#', `;' or `>' characters is considered a comment, and the entire line
ignored.  Comment lines must begin with these characters (after any leading
space).


4.2. Instruction execution

All instructions are ordered for each unit.  All instructions are considered in
the given order, except immediate instructions.  Immediate instructions may
execute in any order.  Long instructions are considered in the order they were
given, and the first allowed one is executed.

If an instruction was not fully executed that turn, it remains in the list for
that module for the next turn, and is reported in the template.  If the module
doesn't receive a new instruction list, even an empty one, it will keep those
instructions.  Any UNIT instruction for that module erases the pending list,
and replaces it with the specified instructions, if any.

An instruction may be completed by various conditionals.  These conditions
further specify under which circumstances an instruction may be considered for
execution.  There are three forms of conditionals:

- The 'wN' condition.  This conditional indicates that the given instruction is
  valid only on the specified week, as numbered from 1 to 13.  This applies to
  immediate instructions as well as long instructions.  Note that, if a long
  instruction is prefixed with a wN, it will execute only that week, regardless
  of the other conditions, but a move instruction will *begin* that week, and
  keep on executing until finished, even if it takes more than a game week to
  execute.

- One or more '-' (dash) conditions.  This conditional indicates that the given
  instruction must be skipped.  When an instruction is completed and removed
  from the instruction list, all instructions that follow have one dash removed
  from them, until the first instruction without a dash prefix.  If an
  instruction cannot execute because it is in error (invalid arguments), all
  instructions with a dash that follows are also removed instead of being
  enabled.  Note that, if the first instruction following an executing
  instruction has two or more dashes, the appropriate amount of dashes will
  be dropped from subsequent instructions.

- The '+' (plus) condition.  This conditional indicates that the given
  instruction is valid, but only as long as the previous instruction has not
  executed.  This is the reverse condition of the dash.  Once the previous
  instruction completes, all instructions having a plus will be removed, up to
  the first one without a plus condition indicator.  If an instruction cannot
  execute and is removed because it is in error (invalid arguments), all dashes
  that follows are simply removed, making the instructions permanent.

- The 'N' duration.  This conditional indicates that the given instruction
  should execute N times, and no more, regardless of other conditions.  If
  there is a condition in the instruction itself, the first condition, either
  duration, or the specified stopping point that occurs will complete the
  instruction.

- The '@' infinite duration.  This conditional indicates that the given
  instruction should never complete.  If a stop condition is specified within
  the given instruction, the instruction will end at that point, and will not
  execute again during that turn, but will be retained for next turn's
  instructions, making automated orders easier to write. `@' and `N' durations
  are mutually exclusive.

The order to specify conditionals is:
	'-' conditions
	'+' condition
	durations
	'wN' condition
followed by the instruction itself.


4.3. Interest instructions

The following are interest-wide instructions, and must be given before the
first UNIT instruction.  They apply to your interest overall, and cannot have
a conditional.

- EMAIL new-email-address
  Change your email address for the next turn.  Note that, to prevent hijacking
  of turn reports by someone who got your interest password, the report for the
  current turn is still sent to your old email address, but will indicate the
  new email address.  Thus, a password change will always be noticeable.

- PASSWORD password
  Change your password for the next turns.  Note that the password change takes
  effect only after the current turn has been executed.

- REGISTER interest-name
  Change your interest name for reports.  Interest names may include letters,
  digits, dashes, dots, but may not include commas or square brackets.

- RESHOW item-tag|tech-tag|module-tag|ALL
  Include in your next report the description of the specified item, technology
  or module. You must have had a descripion of the specified element to use
  a RESHOW. RESHOW ALL re-includes all your knowledge base.

- RESIGN CONFIRM
  Resign from your current position.  All your units revert to the Imperium at
  the end of the turn, or are disbanded.  No unit instructions will be executed
  this turn.

- UNIT unit-or-module-id
  Start giving instructions specific to a unit or module within a unit.  Most
  modules do not require any instruction to function.

  If a module has a set of instructions pending (as indicated in the report
  template), that set of instruction remains valid if no UNIT instruction is
  received.  To cancel a unit's instructions, specify UNIT, with no valid
  instructions until the next UNIT instruction.

4.4. Unit and module instructions

The following are module-specific instructions, and must be given after a UNIT
instruction.  UNIT refers both to a unit as a whole (the core) or a specific
module.

- AT feature-id
  Any.  Immediate condition.  Executes when the module's unit is located in
  orbit of the specified feature (or has been implanted at the specified
  location).  Instead of a feature, a system ID may be specified, and the
  instruction then executes when the module is in the appropriate system,
  regardless of its position within the system.

- BUY amount item-tag|technology-tag|module-tag price
  Any.  Immediate, end of week.  Buys the specified amount of items, modules or
  one copy of a technology that is on sale at the location.  The lowest priced
  offer will be selected first, as long as it doesn't exceed the price
  specified.  The price of the transaction will be the average of the buyer and
  seller prices.

  The purchase fails if the unit lack cash or room to store the purchase.  If a
  core module tries to purchase a module, the module will be added to the unit
  if possible, or the purchase fail.  If a storage module tries to purchase a
  module, the module will be added into the storage.

  If the selling does not complete before the end of the turn, and the
  instruction has a repeat factor (numbered, or infinite), the sale will be
  advertised by the core module in the turn report for every present faction.
  If not, the order will remain in the order stack, but the purchase intention
  will not be advertised.

- CHRISTEN string
  Core module.  Immediate.  Sets the name of the current planet.  You can set
  the name of planet only if the unit is the first unit at that location.

  Christening is impossible for alderson points, oort clouds, or asteroid
  belts.

- CONSUME amount items
  Any.  Immediate at start of turn.  Indicate which items and their amount must
  be consumed for upkeep, if multiple options are possible.  If no CONSUME is
  specified, the upkeep is automatically done after all first week immediate
  orders have been processed.

- CONVERT [sub-module-id]
  Core only.  Long.  Effects a conversion of the given module to the core
  interest.  The module must be inside the core module.  Conversion requires
  5 extra crew member per module copy per week (so if the unit has 1 idle crew,
  the conversion of a single module takes 5 weeks).  If not specified, all
  modules that do not belong to your interest are converted in order.
  If a cargo is converted, all its contents are also converted immediately.
  A module slot is not converted until all the copies in it are converted.

- COPY technology module-id
  Any.  Immediate.  Copies the technology into the specified module, if the
  module has enough memory to hold it, and the current module contains it.  The
  specified module has enough memory if it is currently empty of technologies,
  or has enough technology room to hold the file.

  If the executing module has less technology space than the copied technology
  requires, the COPY also ERASE the technology from its current space.

- ERASE technology
  Any.  Immediate.  Erases the technology from the current module, if the
  module contains it.  Otherwise, executes and does nothing.

- EXCHANGE amount item-tag|module-tag|tech-tag unit-id amount target-tag
  Any.  Immediate.  Execute a trade of the given amount of items, pre-built
  modules, or one technology, as specified in the first part of the
  instruction, with the given amount of itmes, modules or one copy of a
  technology, as specified in the last part of the instruction, from the
  specified unit or module.  The targeted module must be either the module
  giving the matching EXCHANGE, or its core module.

  The instruction will execute only if both interests issue the same
  instructions with the arguments reversed.

- EXPLORE ua-value
  Spaceship/Fleet only.  Long.  Explore the system at the given U.A. range for
  interesting and uncharted features.  May uncover an asteroid belt, or a
  planetoid, in the inner system, or an oort cloud or planetoid on the outer
  system.

  Each week spent in the explore has a 15% chance of uncovering a feature if
  one exists at the indicated range.  If uncharted features exist, but not at
  the given U.A., each unit of difference in U.A. will reduce the chance of
  discovery by 3% for inner system, or by 1% for the outer system.

  Inner system is defined as anything from U.A. 0 to the highest U.A. reported.
  Outer system is defined as anything from the highest U.A. reported outward.

  Anything discovered will be flagged as unexplored.

- GET module-id amount item-tag [remain]
  Any.  Immediate.  Get the appropriate amount of items from the indicated
  module, and store them.  If issued by a core module, the items are stored in
  the first module that can hold them.  Otherwise, the ordering module must be
  able to receive the items, as indicated by the item description.  Storage
  modules can always hold any number of items, up to the size (except crew
  members, which can be stored only in habitat modules). If indicating a core
  module, the items will be received from the first module in that unit that
  has any.

  The instruction is deferred if the indicated module does not hold enough
  items to satisfy the amount to transfer and the optional amount to leave.
  The instruction is impossible if the module does not belong to your interest.

  An amount of zero indicates the maximum possible of items.  An amount to
  remain of zero is ignored.

- GIVE module-id amount item-tag [remain]
  Any.  Immediate.  Give the appropriate amount of items to the indicated
  module, which will store them.  If indicating a core module, the items are
  stored in the first module that can hold them.  Otherwise, the indicated
  module must be able to receive the items (see GET).  If issued by a core
  module, the items will be picked from the first module in that unit that has
  any.

  The instruction is deferred if the indicated module does not hold enough room
  to hold the amount transferred, or the issuing module lacks the items to
  satisfy the amount to transfer and the optional amount to leave.  The
  instruction is impossible if the receiving module does not consider you as
  friendly, or is not allowed store the specified items.

  An amount of zero indicates the maximum possible of items.  An amount to
  remain of zero is ignored.

- HAS amount item-tag|module-tag
  Any.  Immediate condition.  The instruction becomes valid and executes
  (regardless of duration) if the specified amount of items is available in the
  module, or the module slot is composed of the specified number of copies.
  If executed by a core module, the condition looks over all the unit
  (regardless of how many modules are required to satisfy the condition).

- JUMP [feature-id]
  Spaceship/Fleet only.  Long, 1 week.  Jumps through the current or specified
  Alderson point.  A fleet may jump only if it is composed only of ships.  A
  ship does not need to have working engines to jump, but a fixed space station
  cannot issue a jump.

- MOVE feature-id|unit-id
  Spaceship/Fleet only.  Long.  Executes when the appropriate feature-id or
  unit-id is in the system you are in, and you have working engines.  The
  spaceship will break out of the fleet it is in, or undock, and move toward
  the given feature or unit, at a speed proportional to its engine/mass ratio.
  For fleets, the fleet will move as a whole at the speed of the slowest ship
  inside.

  For a ratio of 1, the time for MOVE is equal to (N-M)/2.5+(N+M)/30, where N
  is the U.A. number of the farthest feature, and M the U.A. number of the
  innermost feature.

  If the engine shut down for lack of fuel, the ship or fleet will drift, at
  a third of its original speed.  Another ship must rendezvous with the
  drifting ship, and bring it fuel, or the ship will move inward the system,
  till it hits the sun (U.A. 0), or outward, till it is lost in interstellar
  space (at a U.A. value equals to twice the highest U.A. in the system).

  If a fleet is drifting because one of its ship lacks fuel, it is possible to
  transfer fuel between ships to restore drive.  If this isn't done, it is also
  possible to move the ship out of the fleet, and resume movement.  When
  movement resumes, the pending MOVE is executed again.

  If moving toward a moving unit, will track the unit until a position match is
  possible, or the unit leaves the system.  The positions and movement are
  interpolated, and the meeting is possible in space, in which case the
  tracking fleet or unit will match speeds, and keep on moving at the same
  speed, if possible.  If the tracked target is faster, it is possible that an
  intercept is possible in space, then the unit will be left behind by the
  tracked unit.

- NAME string
  Any.  Immediate.  Sets the visible name for a module.  See the REGISTER rules
  for valid names.

- OATH interest-id
  Any.  Immediate, end of turn.  Changes the loyalty of the module to the new
  interest.  It is valid only if at least one module slot of the specified
  interest is present at the feature or in the same unit as the ordering
  module, and is visible.

  It is always possible to OATH to the Imperium, regardless of the Imperium's
  presence.  Oathing the first city on a terran planet turns the system into
  an Imperial system.

- PATROL CAPTURE|DESTROY [ua-range]
  Spaceship/Fleet only.  Long.  Stay in patrol at a location, interdicting the
  feature to any vessels at a hostile or enemy level.  If such a vessel is
  spotted within the specified UA range, the ship ordering ship will
  automatically MOVE toward the ship and proceed to attack it using the
  specified type of attack.

  If the range is unspecified, the ship will remain at its present location,
  and only attack if the ship arrives at the location.

- RECEIVE new-module-id [interest-id]
  Core/Storage only.  Immediate.  Indicates a placeholder for the transfer or
  creation of a new module.  If an interest is specified, the module
  placeholder will be created for the specified interest, allowing the
  construction of shared units.  In all cases, the new-module-id must include
  your interest ID, not the other interest.  Valid for inactive modules.

- REROUTE feature-id|unit-id
  Spaceship/Fleet only.  Long.  Use only if the first instruction in a turn.
  Cancels any executing MOVE instruction, then redirects the ship toward the
  new feature ID or unit, as in a MOVE.  The duration is computed between the
  ship current position and the new destination, with 1 U.A. added to the
  movement (in both additive and difference factors of the formula).

- RESEARCH module-id|item-tag|technology-tag|location-id
  Research only.  Full turn.  Add a number of research point to the current
  unit and make any technology discovered in that unit having 50% chance of
  being related the specified module, item, location type, or an advance to an
  existing technology.  The subject of the research must be present within the
  unit to use the RESEARCH order, or the unit must be at the given location and
  remain at that location for the entire turn.

- RESET flag-name
  Any.  Immediate.  Clears the specified flag.  See the SET order for the
  various allowed flags.

- ROUTE feature-ids...
  Spaceship/Fleet only.  Long.  Proceed along a route, for periodic movement.
  After a move has completed, the ship will check on the route instruction.
  The first occurrence of the feature ID that is found indicates the starting
  point, the next occurrence being the intended destination for a MOVE order.

  If the current feature is an Alderson point, and the next destination isn't
  in the same system, a JUMP is assumed.

  If the first occurrence of the current location is the last feature in the
  list, the instruction either completes (if unrepeated) or the entire list
  will be reversed, allowing the ship to trace its route back to its original
  starting point.

- SEE module-id
  Any.  Immediate condition.  Executes when the specified module is located at
  the same location (either in transit, orbit, or landed) as the ordering
  module.

- SELL amount item-tag|technology-tag|module-tag price
  Any.  Immediate at end of week.  Sells the specified amount of items, modules
  or one copy of a technology at the location.  The highest priced request will
  be selected first, as long as it doesn't stay below the price specified.  The
  price of the transaction will be the average of the seller and buyer prices.

  The selling fails if the unit lack the module or item, or has no technology.
  If a storage module tries to sell a module, the module will be picked from
  its storage.

  If the selling does not complete before the end of the turn, and the
  instruction has a repeat factor, the sale will be advertised by the core
  module in the turn report for every present faction.

- SET flag-name
  Any.  Immediate.  Sets the specified flag.  The following flags are
  available:
  * MUTE.  If set, this module does not contribute in any way to the
    technological research of the unit.
  * SHUT.  If set, this module is not working, and does not provide or require
    crew, energy or consume anything.  If the core is SHUT, all the unit will
    be considered shut down as well.
  * SILENCE.  If set, unit stops broadcasting its interest identifier for all
    other units.
  * SUPPORT.  If set, indicates that the unit's upkeep must be wired from the
    credit line rather than local cash, if possible (Imperial station presence
    in the system).
  * WIRE_SALARY.  If set, indicates that the crew salary must be wired from the
    credit line rather than local cash.

- SHUTDOWN
  Any.  Immediate.  The ordering module is temporarily shut down (equivalent to
  the setting of the SHUT flag) for the week. The duration of the order allows
  to specify the shutdown time.  The SHUTDOWN order is parallel to the SHUT
  flag; the end of the SHUTDOWN command does not reactivate a module whose SHUT
  flag has been set.

- STORE module-target-id
  Any.  Immediate.  The ordering module will be moved from their current
  storage to the new storage.  If this is an inactive module, it is equivalent
  to a TRANSFER of the whole module.  If this is the core module of a unit, the
  target module must be a storage or unit identifier, and the unit is stored
  inside the unit.  Use this to dock to a base, or place a space base in a
  mass transportation ship.  Valid for inactive modules.

  Ground-based units and non-core active modules cannot use the STORE command.

- SYNCHRO module-id [synchronisation-point-name]
  Any.  Immediate condition.  Execute only when the designated module executes
  the matching SYNCHRO specifying the executing module, and the optional name.
  If the name is omitted, the other SYNCHRO order must also omit a name.
  Valid for inactive modules.

- TRANSFER amount module-target-id
  Any.  Immediate.  The amount of modules in the current module is transfered
  and added to the target.  The target may be an empty module ID, or a module
  of the same type, in which case the modules are added to the given target, or
  a core or storage module, in which case the modules will be added inside the
  module, either to the modules of the same type and interest, or creating a
  new module.  Valid for inactive modules.
  It is not possible to transfer modules out of a working module.

- USE tech [amount [module-target-id]]
  Any.  Long.  Make use of the specified technology, producing effects or
  products, and consuming, if required, any raw materials.  The optional
  module target indicates where the resulting product, module or item, should
  be placed, or what the focus of the technology is.  The optional amount
  indicates the number of times the technology should be used; the default of 0
  being to use the technology for as long as possible.

  If a non-zero amount is specified, the order does not complete until the
  amount of goods produced is done.  If the order also has a repetition factor,
  it will then be skipped for the rest of the turn, but will restart on the
  next game quarter.

  Note: It is not possible to skip the amount, and specify a target module.
  Use 0 as the amount to specify as many results as possible.

- WAIT
  Any.  Immediate condition.  Execute only when the duration has elapsed.
  Note that, to achieve the expected effect (the next instruction executes
  after N weeks have passed), the instruction executes only after one
  additional week has elapsed (so, the effective duration is N+1, but the
  conditionals are triggered also at week N+1).  Valid for inactive modules.

- WITHDRAW amount [item-tag]
  Any.  Immediate.  Extract cash from the interest fund and store it in the
  ordering module.  Requires an Imperium unit in the same system, or the
  appropriate technology or specific module.

  During your first turn, you may withdraw from any location in the game, not
  just the Imperium, to facilitate your startup. You may also withdraw a
  number of extra food items, which will be purchased using the basic price,
  by adding the `food' tag to the command.

4.5. Sample actions

4.5.1. Creating a new spaceship

The simplest spaceship consists of one core (a shull1 module built using the
sassemb technology), one command bridge (a cbridg module, built using the
spcntrl technology), two crew quarters (crewq1 module, crewhsn technology), two
fission reactors (fisrec module, urfissi technology), and one reaction engine
(rdrive module, reactio technology).  All of these technologies are available
without requiring the download of a technology.

- Step 1: The core of the building unit specifies a target for the construction
	UNIT 1234
	RECEIVE mc54N01

- Step 2: Build the core and command bridge
	UNIT f1234
	USE sassemb 1 mc54N01
	USE spcntrl 1 mc54N01
	USE crewhsn 2 mc54N01
	USE urfissi 2 mc54N01
	USE reactio 1 mc54N01

Then, after the ship completion, crew may be transferred, supplies loaded, and
the ship sent out on its first mission. We have enough for about 10 turns:

- Step 3: Crew the ship
	UNIT mc54N01
	-GET p1234 20 uran
	--GET c1234 200 food
	--GET c1234 20 crew
	-GET m1234 100 h2o2
	-GET 1234 2000 cash

Note that we had the loading of the crew conditional to the loading of reactor
supplies.  This is because the loading proceeds immediately as a module can
receive the appropriate item (i.e. uranium as soon as power is established,
food as soon as crew quarters are added).  If we had the crew settle in the
ship before energy became available, we would run the risk of death from the
unpowered and unpressurised ship.

4.5.2. Maintaining a city

A city requires, in order: fuel for its power supplies, food for its inhabitant
and cash for the maintenance of the city and payment of your employees.
Typically, a sample city would look like:

- City [1234], city.
  - Condo [h1234], 5 habitat units.
  - Farms [f1234], 2 farm.
  - Mines [m1234], 1 mine.
  - Coal burner [e1234], 1 power station.

The first step is to ensure that farms are delivering a steady supply of
goods to the condo:

- Step 1: Farm and feed the population
	UNIT f1234
	@USE farming
	@GIVE h1234 0 food

The "@" character ensures automated repetition.  Unless you change ideas, the
farm will then work automatically, delivering its supplies to the habitat units
each week.

	UNIT h1234
	@CONSUME 50 food

The same apply here.  Food is consumed at the beginning of the turn, and the
"@" ensures repetition of the order.  In fact, since only 1 type of food is
delivered by the farming concern, CONSUME is unnecessary; the default item will
automatically be used by the condo.

- Step 2: Mine coal, and power the city

	UNIT m1234
	@USE hcarbon 1
	@GIVE e1234 1 carb

The mine will work, and produce 1 unit of hydrocarbon.  Once this production is
done, the mine will ignore the order for the rest of the turn, and the "@" will
keep the order for next turn automation.  Once produced, the carbon (coal) is
handed off the coal burner.  The coal burner can also use the CONSUME, or burn
off automatically its coal supply.

- Step 3: Provide a steady income

	UNIT m1234
	@USE hcarbon 1
	@GIVE e1234 1 carb
	@USE imining
	@SELL 0 iron 0

The previous orders are completed.  Once coal extraction for the quarter has
finished, iron is mined and sold on the local market.  This will bring in cash
(assuming there's a local market for iron), which will automatically be picked
up by the core module to pay for the upkeep.

4.5.3. Shipping supplies across distances

Let's assume you have a powerful mining concern in an asteroid belt, mining
transuranics there, and your industrial base is located on the system next
door.  You thus have various things to move to and from:

- Getting food from the base to the mining station
- Getting upkeep cash (supplies) from the base to the mining station
- Getting transuranics back to your industrial base

Three units must be involved:

- Your mining base (1234)
- Your operational base (2345)
- One supply ship (3456)

All this can be done with a single unit orders:

	UNIT 3456
	@ROUTE S7890D S7890A S6789B S6789E
	@GET 2345 60 food
	@GET 2345 2000 cash
	@GIVE 1234 0 food 20
	@GIVE 1234 0 cash 800
	@GET 1234 0 brkl 3
	@GIVE 2345 0 brkl

The order unit is the ship (using the core).  First, we set up a route.  The
route starts at your operational base (S7890D), and moves out to the 1st
alderson point in the system (S7890A).  The next hop along the route is in a
different system (S6789B), so the ship will then jump.  Once at the 2nd
alderson point in the system, the ship then proceeds toward the belt (S6789E)
to rendezvous with your mining base.

The rest of the orders concern themselves with the loading and unloading of all
the supplies.  60 food (enough for a little over a turn) are loaded into the
ship, and all but 20 food (to feed the ship's crew!) will be unloaded once at
destination.  Similarly, cash will be loaded, and enough cash to pay for the
ship's upkeep will be retained.

Finally, berkelium (a good transuranic) is loaded for transfer back.  3 units
are left on site, to fuel (using the appropriate technology) the local power
station.

4.5.4. A short guide to viable units

When planning a new unit, ask yourself the following questions:

- What will I use this unit for?
- How will I upgrade/expand it later?

The answers to the first question usually indicate a set of modules you will
require.  For example, a good space-station usually requires docking bays and
factory modules.  A planetary university requires lots of research modules.
Spaceships will require engine.  Raiding ships require that and lots of
attack and defence.

When planning a new unit you must satisfy the following constraints:

1) The total of supplied energy (energy:0/X modules) in the unit must be
   greater or equal to the required energy in the unit (energy:X modules).

2) The total of the crew manning the unit (crew:0/1 items) in the unit must be
   greater or equal to the required workforce in the unit (crew:X modules).
   This leads to the minimum number of habitat modules.

3) In a spaceship, the total of the engines (mass:0/X modules) must be
   adequate compared to the sum of the mass of the unit.  You can do with
   smaller engines, but your unit will be slower.  Note that this may cause
   an increase in the required energy.

4) Finally, your core size (size:N/X modules) must be large enough to hold all
   the standard modules (size:X modules) that comprise it.  This is where the
   2nd question occurs: unless you use an open core which can be expanded, a
   core will limit the expansion after a period of use.

Usually, when you add the 2nd constraint, you may have to increase the energy
supply. Similarly, the adding of the engines increases the energy required,
which in turn may increase the amount of crew needed.  Fitting cores over the
rest of the unit is best left to the last, since most cores have low mass and
few energy or crew requirements.


5. Report description

The report format has been presented in the sample report description.  The
following chapters describe more formally how the report is formatted, and how
to read the various elements within.

5.1. Heading

The heading contains two separate sections.  The general information summarises
your game information.  This section is always present, and includes:
- The game name, game date, and the deadline for the next turn.
- Your faction info: name, identifier, email address for reports, credit line.
- Optionally, a summary showing how many units you own, how many technologies
  you know of, and how many technologies you master (see later).

The second part of the heading contains in-game announcements that concern your
interest and no one else.  Generic game announcements are placed in the game
newspaper.  Very important notices are also duplicated in this section to be
sure you get them.

5.2. The system reports

This section contains system reports, one per system.  The report begins with
the single line "Star systems:", then proceed to detail each system, in their
system ID order.

System description has two separate parts: The system header, then the feature
list.  The system header indicates the system name, the system ID, and then the
system star type and coordinates relative to the center of the Galaxy.

5.2.1. Adjacent systems

If you have the requisite technologies for inter-stellar travel without using
Alderson point jumps, the system header continues then with a section titled
"Adjacent systems:", which is followed by all systems in range of your
technology, indicating their name, their ID, type, coordinates and travel
duration in game years or weeks.  Each system in range is on a separate line:

> Adjacent systems:
> - sysname name [id], system type (coordinates), N years M weeks.

The duration indicated indicates how fast a ship might travel at the speed of
light between the two systems.  Most ships will not be able to approach this
limit.

The game will not indicate systems for which the best travel time, given your
technology, is greater than 10 years.

5.3. Feature reports

Each feature appear as a separate section.  A feature is separated from the
previous feature by two empty lines.

Each feature starts with a star character `*', followed by the following:

- The feature name.
- The feature ID enclosed in square brackets.
- If the feature is an alderson point, the "to" indication, followed by the
  destination star system name, and the destination star system feature ID.
- A comma character.
- The feature type. The most common feature types are:
  + "gas giant"
  + "brown dwarf" (a sub-type of gas giant of great mass)
  + "ringed giant" (a sub-type of gas giant combined with a belt)
  + "terran planet"
  + "desert terran planet"
  + "jungle terran planet"
  + "ocean terran planet"
  + "icy terran planet"
  + "airless planet" (non-terran planet)
  + "carbon-heated planet" (non-terran planet)
  + "radioactive planet" (non-terran planet)
  + "methane planet" (non-terran planet)
  + "chlorine planet" (non-terran planet)
  + "volcanic planet" (non-terran planet)
  + "alien planet" (non-terran planet)
  + "asteroid belt"
  + "planetoid"
  + "comet" (mobile planetoid)
  + "oort cloud"
  + "alderson point"
  + "XX star" (secondary star in binary systems)
- The location within the star system, specified in U.A. All features are
  sorted within a system from the farther out (higher UA) to the innermost
  feature (lower UA).
- If the location has never been explored, it has the notice: ", unexplored".

See the feature guide for more details on the various features.

5.3.1. Feature resources

Most of the features are used as a source for resources.  Any feature that
provide resources will automatically report if any of your units is located on
or in orbit of that location.

The resources are reported as "Resources:", followed by a comma-separated list
of an amount, a resource type name, and the resource tag, enclosed in square
brackets.

5.4. Module reports

Modules are prefixed by a '+' if they belong to you, or a '-' if they belong to
another interest.  The entire module description is always folded over two
columns after this sign:

> + a very long module description may follow, which, if too long, will result
>   in folding to the column as show.

Core modules are shown starting on column 0, and all internal modules are
indented two characters starting from that.  Inactive, stored modules are
indented four characters from their core (two from their storage module).
Units docked into cargo or hanger bays are also indented four characters from
the dock unit's core, recursively (you may have units docked into docked units
and storage facilities in these units).

All units at the same feature are displayed with an intervening blank line.
All units in transit are displayed at the nearest feature, and have a blank
line separating them from the feature itself, or the previous unit.

5.4.1. Generic info

A module line may contain some or all of:

- The module visual name (always)

- The module unique id, enclosed in square brackets (always)

- A comma, followed by the interest visual name and unique id enclosed in
  square brackets, unless the module has shut down its transponder (set the
  silence flag) and the module does not belong to you.

- A comma, followed by the number of copies in the module slot, followed by
  the module type name and module type tag enclosed in square brackets, if the
  module belongs to you,
- or a comma, followed by the module type name, if the module is a core of
  a different interest, and you do not have a module inside that core
- or a comma, followed by the number of copies in the module slot, followed
  by the module type name, if the module belongs to a different interest, and
  is either in an open core module, or you have a module inside that core.

- A comma-separated list of flags set for that module, if the module belongs
  to your interest.  The flags may be the following:
  * "inactive" (the module is not in a working unit)
  * "muted" (the module has the MUTE flag set)
  * "shut down" (the module has the SHUT flag set)
  * "silent id" (the module has the SILENT flag set)
  * "supported" (the module has the SUPPORT flag set)
  * "wired salaries" (the module has the WIRE_SALARY flag set)

- A comma, the keyword "contains:", then a list of items stored inside the
  module.  That list is a comma-separated repetition of a number, visual item
  name, and bracket-enclosed item tag.  This is list is visible only if the
  module belongs to your interest.

- A period, ending this first part.

5.4.2. Module statistics

If the module does not belong to your interest, you only have access to the
"Size" attribute.  Core modules report their maximum size, unless they are
open modules.  If the module is in a shared unit, and you are the owner of the
core module, you also have access to the mass, crew and energy, attack and
defense values.

The statistics is given as a list of comma-separated elements, and ends with a
period.

- "Size:", followed by the size actually used, and an optional `/' character
  and the size available.  For storage modules, the size used is the size the
  module uses in its unit, not the size of the modules stored in it.

- "Mass:", followed by the mass of the module and contents, and an optional `/'
  character and the mass propulsion capacity.

- "Speed:", followed by the effective speed, up to 3 decimal places. This appear
  only on mobile core modules, such as ships and fleets.

- "Crew:", followed by the number of crew members required, and an optional `/'
  character and the number of crew members provided.

- "Energy:", followed by the amount of energy required, and an optional `/'
  character and the amount of energy available.

- "Upkeep:", followed by the `$' character, and the amount of upkeep required
  for the module and contents.  Crew upkeep is never included in this.

- "Attack:", followed by the base attack factor, and an optional effective
  attack factor enclosed in parentheses.

- "Defense:", followed by the base defense factor, and an optional effective
  defense factor enclosed in parentheses.

- "Tech:", followed by the total storage used by technologies in this module,
  followed by a `/' character, and the maximum storage available.

The period ends the list of elements.  Elements with a value of zero are not
reported.  A core module slot will report the sum of all the factors from its
active containing modules, except for the Tech value, which is the contribution
from the core unit itself.  A storage module slot will report its own values,
except for the mass value, which is the sum of of the storage module copies and
the modules or units stored within the storage area.

A fleet reports usually only the Speed characteristic, which is the smallest of
all its ships, or nothing if the fleet orbits around an immobile space unit such
as a station.

5.4.3. Module technologies

If the module slot has a technology loaded, and belongs to your interest, the
contents of the technology is listed after the statistics.  This list begins
with a "Tech:" indicator, followed by a comma-separated list of technology
names and bracket-enclosed technology tags.

5.4.4. Module reports

If the module slot belongs to you, the next and following lines may comprise a
module report.  Each line is indented 4 spaces from the starting character of
the module slot.

A report line indicates the "week" keyword, the week number within the quarter
(from 1 to 13), a colon `:' character, a space separator, and a free-form
report line.  If the line is too large for your display size, it will be folded
and continue after the initial "week X: " display.

5.4.5. Travel indication

If the unit is moving at the time of the report, its core is separated from the
previous elements (feature or unit) by a blank line.  The moving unit also has
a line indicating its movement.  The line is indented 4 spaces from the start
of the core slot description, and has the following format :

"Moving to XXX [xxx], at U.A. n, W weeks remaining."

where "XXX" is the targeted feature name, "[xxx]" the feature ID, "n" the
current value of the U.A., and "W" the time required to complete the journey.

If the unit is tracking another unit, the feature name and ID are replaced by
those of the target unit name and ID.

If the unit is drifting and lacks propulsion, the display will change once the
destination has been reached, and will show either

"Moving inward, at U.A. n, W weeks before zero.".
	or
"Moving outward, at U.A. n, W weeks before system escape."

depending on the direction of the drift.

5.4.6. Market indications

If the unit is not moving, it may have uncompleted transactions waiting for
prospective customers.  In that case, the unit has a line indicating its
market status.  The line is indented 4 spaces from the start of the core slot
description, and either indicates "Buying:" or "Selling:", followed by a
comma-separated list of an amount, an item, module or technology name, the
bracket-enclosed appropriate tag, a `@' character, and an indicated price.

The price is either the minimum required (for selling), or the maximum at
which the core module will purchase (for buying).

If the same core indicated two or more purchase or sell orders for the same
items, only the last one is advertised.  Note that all tags indicated in a sale
or purchase advertised are automatically added to your knowledge base.

5.5. Knowledge reports

Knowledge reports appear in a separate section.  Each section begins with a
"New XXXX knowledge:" line.  Items, modules and technologies are reported
individually in their own sections.

5.5.1. Item knowledge

The knowledge entry for an item is split as follows:

* The item name.
* The item tag, enclosed in square brackets.
* A colon `:' character.
* A free-form text, indicating the use of the item.  This part is not
  significant.
* The maximum amount of items that can be stored in a module copy.  A module
  slot may carry this number times the nomber of copies in the slot for each
  item type.  The sentence used is "May store NN per module."
* The type of modules in which the item may be stored, if any.  The module
  types indicated are either a specific module name, or one of the module types
  reported in the module knowledge entry.  The sentence used is "May store in
  xxxxxx modules".  If multiple modules are allowed, the sentence has a
  comma-separated list of module types.  All items, except crew members, may
  be stored in a storage module, or a module whose description indicates it may
  accept that item type.
* If the item has modifier statistics, these statistics are displayed, in a
  manner similar to a module report.  The indicated statistics are for a single
  item.  Multiplied by the number of items presents, they are added to the
  module slot statistics.

  An exception is crew members.  Their upkeep is not added to the module slot,
  but paid separately.
* Outlaw index.  If the item is a product of an outlawed technology, the
  technology outlaw factor is reported here again.  Possession of the item in
  any unit shared with the Imperium, or any non-ship unit will add the outlaw
  index to your interest outlaw risk (only once per item type).

5.5.2. Module knowledge

The knowledge entry for a module is split as follows:

* The module name
* The module tag, enclosed in square brackets
* A colon `:' character.
* A free-form text, indicates the use of the module.  This part is not
  significant.
* A location restriction indicator.  This specify in which core modules or on
  which type of locations the module may be located.  If a module indicates it
  may be only placed at a certain feature type, it cannot be built in a mobile
  unit.
* A module type.  If a module belongs to different categories, all categories
  are listed separated by `/' characters.
* A function restriction indicator.  This specify in which environment the
  module may function.  The module may be built or located at a different
  feature type, but will only work if the containing unit is located at that a
  feature of that type.
* The module base statistics.  These statistics must be multiplied by the
  number of copies in a slot to yield the overall slot statistics, except for
  the tech statistics (see the chapter on technology).
* An optional technology requirement.  The sentence used is "Requires xxxxx
  [xxxx] to function."  The name and tag of a technology are indicated.  The
  described module always has the indicated technology loaded, unless something
  wipes the technology from it, shutting down the module until a new copy is
  loaded.
* Outlaw index.  If the module is a product of an outlawed technology, the
  technology outlaw factor is reported here again.  Storage or use of the
  module type in any unit shared with the Imperium, any non-ship unit, or as a
  core unit for a ship will add the outlaw index to your interest outlaw risk
  (only once per module type).

5.5.3. Technology knowledge

The knowledge entry for a technology is split as follows:

* The technology name
* The technology tag, enclosed in square brackets
* A colon `:' character.
* A free-form text, indicates the use of the technology.  This part is not
  significant.
* A module usage restriction.  The technology must be uploaded in the specified
  module type before being applicable.  If a restriction is specified, the
  technology will produce no effects, or will not be allowed a the argument of
  the USE command until placed in a module of the named category.
* An optional technology requirement, of the form "Requires xxxxx [xxxx]."
  The technology will be useable only in modules that already have the
  specified technology loaded and active.
* A raw materials requirements.  This indication begins with "Use consumes:",
  and is followed by a comma-separated list of amount, item names, and item
  tags enclosed in square brackets.  Each product of the technology will
  require the amount of materials indicated from within the unit.
* A production.  This production may either be reported as:
  - "Use builds:" for modules;
  - "Use produces:" for manufactured items;
  - "Use harvests:" for harvested items.
  followed by the amount of production, the production name and tag, and the
  required duration, in weeks, for the production.
* The tech modifier statistics.  These statistics modify the statistics of the
  module slot in which they are loaded, unless the technology is inactive.
  The modification is applied once, regardless of the number of copies in the
  module slot, unless the technology description includes the words "for each
  module copy".
* A technology level.  That technology level indicates how much storage is
  required for the technology to function.
* Outlaw index.  If the technology is outlawed by the Imperium, the seriousness
  of the ban is indicated here.  The storage of the technology in any module
  in a unit shared with the Imperium, or any non-ship unit will add the outlaw
  index to your interest outlaw risk, even if the technology is inactive (only
  once per technology copy).


6. Features guide

A sample guide to features you may encounter shows you what to expect at any
given location.

6.1. Alderson points

This is the simplest feature, as it is "featureless".  Alderson points are
simply mathematical loci in space, where inter-stellar transit may occur.
Alderson points are moving according to local space-time rules, so anything may
be built at the location and will remain in orbit in the vicinity of the point
itself.

6.2. Stars

Stars are located at U.A. 0, by convention, and do not rate a specific feature
line, being already mentioned in the system header line.  Any unit reaching
U.A. 0 will be destroyed by the star's energy output. Rumors exist about
technologies (anyone heard of using a laser for... cooling?) to allow one to
survive this.  Note that Alderson points open mainly in singleton star systems.
A few systems will have a binary star, typically when the star is a lot smaller
and less active than the primary.  The secondary star rates a specific feature
entry.

Moving to a secondary star is equivalent to moving to the primary, and causes
destruction unless you are protected.


6.3. Terran planets

The most useful of the planets, by far, but also a relatively rare occurrence.
Terran planets present an abundance of free water (oxyhydro [h2o2] resources)
and carbonaceous matters (carbon [carb]), over a core of various levels in
minerals (iron [iron], copper [copp], titanium [tita], silicium [sili] and
uranium [uran]).  These planets may accept any form of settlement, and can
harvest food in variable quantities (desert planets have usually a lower amount
of oxyhydro and food).

Sub-types include: basic terran planets, desert planets (more minerals, fewer
food), ocean terran planets (lots of oxyhydro and food, low carbon and
minerals), jungle terran planets (lots of food and carbon, less minerals).

6.4. Non-terran planets

These solid planetary bodies are usually very rich in minerals, and often have
special resources, but lack oxyhydro and usually carbon, and never allow simple
food harvesting.

These planets can accept only special outpost settlements.

Sub-types include: airless planets, carbon-heated planets (carbon, sometimes
oxyhydro), rocky planets (more iron), radioactive planets (more uranium), alien
planets (who harbor a form of life, but one that is incompatible with ours) and
others...

6.5. Gas giants

These planets are usually composed of a main mix of very volatile elements, and
lack a solid ground at an accessible pressure and gravity combination.  It is
normally impossible to build any settlement there.

Gas giants are very rich in tritium [hel3] and often in oxyhydro [h2o2] as
well. Ringed giants may combine those resources with minerals, extracted from
the rings themselves.  Ringed giants are considered a combination of gas giant
and asteroid belt.  Brown dwarves are gas giants of very high mass (several
times that of Jupiter in the earth system).  Brown dwarves present difficulties
in resource harvesting, being also a source of high energies.

It is not possible to build a settlement over gas giants.

6.6. Asteroid belts

These represent failed planets; debris left from the formation of the system
that failed to agglomerate into a planet.  Asteroid belts offer a very wide
variety of minerals, often in larger accessible quantities than any planetary
body.

It is not possible to build a settlement in asteroid belts.

6.7. Planetoids

Most planetoids are undiscovered.  These represent an intermediate step between
planets (non-terran ones) and asteroid belts.  One finds unusual mixes of
minerals and resources, sometimes combining oxyhydro, carbon and minerals (but
never food) at a planetoid.

It is not possible to build more than one settlement on a planetoid.

Cometary bodies are an intermediate between an oort cloud and a planetoid.
They follow the rules for planetoids, but always have volatiles in great
amounts.  Unlike other features, cometary bodies will move from UA to UA,
typically moving down toward UA 1, then back up toward the maximum UA known for
the system.  Most comets change by 1 UA per quarter.  The feature report will
include a "heading out at UA n" or "heading in at UA n" mention to indicate the
direction of the comet.

6.8. Oort cloud

Oort cloud represent a diffuse and nebulous area, far from the star, where
cometary bodies orbit the system.  Oort cloud are usually very poor in minerals
except some exceptional ones, but are usually very rich in carbon [carb] and
oxyhydro [h2o2] resources, often more than any planet, making possible
self-supporting bases in an otherwise lifeless area.

The Oort cloud is usually located father than the alderson zone, typically
between 200% and 400% of the distance to the farthest alderson point or
planet in the system.  There is only one Oort cloud per system, and it is
usually undiscovered.

6.9. Other features

There might be exotic features in some star systems.  Rumors exist about some
systems with planet-sized artefacts left by ancient civilisations, black holes
orbiting suns and causing all kind of strange phenomena or other, stranger
products of unknown physics.  These features may or may not be undiscovered
in systems, and their effects will remain unknown until effectively
encountered.

The exotic features are often source of technologies.  Doing a RESEARCH over
such an exotic feature will always yield a technology (i.e. it raises your
chance of technology discovery to 100%, unless you are trying to RESEARCH two
such feature on the same turn) that is specifically placed at the feature by
the game.  These technologies are often very large (level 5 to 15)!

A good suggestion: it is considered unwise to try approaching a black hole at
close range, unless you know what you are doing :)
